
Let us say you are building a jigsaw puzzle. A huge one. There are thousands of little pieces. Even bigger number of edges that must fit with each other to finally shape up the puzzle. It feels almost impossible that someone can put it together. The only information that you have is it will finally become a beautiful picture of you and you and your fiance. All the pieces are sitting there is a big poly pack on your dining table and you are too busy to look at them. Why would someone gift you a puzzle on your engagement. You wonder and curse the soul of your cousin who came up with this idea. Your fiance is the last person who will help you put this together. You talked to him casually but you know he would rather spend time on video games..

Finally, one day , almost a month after your engagement ; when things sobered up in your mind. You got done with all the exciting things ; and the chores. You take up the challenge. Alone. No one is there to help you. Your family is bunch of jokers who can't even put a picture in the frame. You can't imagine they are coming to your rescue. Only thing you know is it will become a beautiful picture and it is going to take many days. Many many iterations. It is a process - It is a `Yajna`. 

First day you spread the pieces on the table. Wondering where to start. Luckily the pieces for your big glasses showed up. It was just a coincidence that the first thing you saw was the eyes. That day you looked for every single piece that can fit together to make your eyes. And the thick glasses on them. You must have turned five hundred blocks to get the eyes together. It was love of labor. You drank two beers to keep you going that evening. 

Next day, while brewing  your coffee, you were automatically pulled towards the dining table. May be I can fit another piece ..Luck favoured , the lips showed up. It is as if someone is helping you inside. 

# Manifestation 


The picture on the  jigsaw puzzle is the encrypted knowledge of in the poly bag that was sitting on your dining table. You toiled for ten days to decrypt this knowledge. But you didn't decrypt the picture !

What you decrypted is the skill to put the puzzles together. That is the knowledge you gained out of this `Yajna`. This knowledge will help you put any other jigsaw together faster than me. 

In the process you manifested a beautiful picture of you and your fiance. It looks so good on the table that your mom took a picture and posted on Facebook. Every guest who shows up on dining table to eat their meals , marvel at the picture rather than the wine. Lost in their food and wine , they have no clue how it is done. All they know is a picture, that was broken into many pieces can be put together if someone spends time. Exactly the same information that you knew before you started your jigsaw puzzle. Only thing is this form is more way more inspiring than the one you started with . That was a challenge. This is an inspiration. 

> A yajna is thus the process of making the information more palatable. Information stays the same. Knowledge still remains encrypted in the final manifestation. 

A manifestation is important because unless you manifest , you wouldn't know if the part of the knowledge that you intended to decrypt is fully done or not. 

## Why knowledge is cryptic

Encrypted doesn't mean it is hidden. It is right there but it takes much larger effort to understand it. Our senses can not prioritize enough time to understand every single detail. Effectively they will need to go through all the ten days worth of effort themselves to understand what you learnt. Thus it is more useful to consume the manifestation and be inspired from it to do something that you intend to learn. 

In other words - you can take the mesh as a template, but you will need to fill up every cell with your own knowledge.  For example this book is information. If you read this, it will only create a structure in your mind. You will need to fill in this structure with your own Yajna. 

## Information Registry

You don't need to publish the book on Amazon, the moment you wrote the book, that book itself is the communication that you have decrypted "writing" as a skill.  In a way its brochure for sensory consumption  (manifestation) got registered in the universally distributed block chain. Any seeker conscious agent can check it out. This is the primal registry of all the information. It keeps a record of all the manifestations. As the new and better manifestations come in , the older ones are rendered useless. They are purged or go into cold data store. No one any way wants buy old cameras any more cuz you have GoPro Hero now.

Search engines and Facebook feed is only helping you find better results for what you are seeking. They don't change your quest for your quest is run from another part of your mind `Mana` - We will talk about it in the "Ritual of Information"

In essence, spending too much time is making your manifestation visually appealing or easily searchable, is quite a time taken away from the `Yajna` - without much benefit. Because the seeker will find your manifestation if it worth. Non seekers will never even look at it no matter how many times it shows up on their feed. 

Your intent to manifest was to complete your Yajna. If you are lost in getting the clicks then you are anyway attaching the desires that will lead to pain - happy cycles. 

# Yajna

`Yajna` is thus the process of decrypting a piece of [protected] knowledge. Converting it it into a skill and then manifesting something more inspiring than what you consumed. 

You get two four  things  out of Yajna. 
    - A piece of decrypted knowledge that stays only with you. 
    - An artifact for sensory consumption. For your  own self or other conscious agents. 
    - Peace for you as long as you are consumed in the actions. Even if you didn't want to do it in the beginning , as you indulge in the actions , the peace starts flowing in. You lose sense of time. 
    - Help - Your practice pulls you in. As if someone is holding your hand. Giving you the clues. Game has inbuilt help built into it. As you cross one bridge, your sight automatically clears up for the next. After few rounds, you don't need to look at the manual anymore. You kinda start knowing what is the next thing. 


## Sakaam Yajna 

You can choose to attach a favorable outcome with your manifestation. Means you can make a wish that the book you wrote, will sell a million copies. It has nothing to do with your book. If there are a million seekers, you will feel happy. If there is no taker, you will blame Amazon. Means cycles of pain and happiness. 

If you want your manifestation (book in this case) to be successful, you will put in more effort in it but you will also carefully withhold something so that it doesn't become a sensory overload. Which means most of your focus shifts to the configuration that is best consumed. Is it a live performance - e.g a building or a concert or is it better in a movie format. So you spend more and more time in format than the knowledge that you are unlocking. More effort you spend on improving the consumability , more you are raising your expectations. A million copies , ten million clicks ... Not only you are spending less time on actual content (practice), you are raising your bar of happiness. 

## Nishkaam Yajna 

If you choose to attach no outcome with your manifestation - you wont even publish it on Amazon. You wrote the book. You gained the knowledge . You got the writing skills. You manifested the book just  to confirm the skill and complete your `Yajna`. That is it. By the act of writing , you already registered the communication that a book exists. You have no further expectations. Means you are at peace. 

Most of the chores that we do on daily basis are a type of `Nishkaam Yajna`. We may not want to indulge in them but we know doing them always gives us peace. Service is a `Nihkaam Yajna` . 

`Karm Yoga` can be `Sakaam` as well as `Nishkaam`. There is nothing good or bad about it. It all depends what you want. Gita says "Nishkaam Yajna" is the way to exit. `Sakam Yajna` enhances the bondage in this universe. 

> A question on exit - When we say exit from the sensory universe - then there must be an entry into something ? what is that ? Hope fully I will get to the answer in due course ..stay tuned

## Wasted Effort
The sensory inputs that we consume in are good, if they inspire you to get into your own `Yajna`. If you are just consuming for pleasure or if you are adjusting your actions (not Yajna) , to seek a pleasurable outcome (Jackpot) - Gita calls it "Wasted Effort"  - `Vyartha Cheshta". Wasted effort not only wastes your time, it increases the bondage with sensory reality. And thus leads to cycles of pain and happiness. Mostly pains because happiness is normally attached to one specific outcome - wherever possible outcomes are very many more. 

`Sakaam Yajna` is much better way to get to desired outcomes. Your rigor might lead to a better chance of favourable outcome but it also means you will have higher expectations. Success will mean more happiness but at the same time failure means bgger pain. 

> `Nishkaam Yajna` Is the way to peace. We will see how and why down the line .


