Now that we have basic idea of `Vrittis` - the fundamental games to create the consciousness , let us see how we observe them and how such observations lead to the spin - the basic motion of the universe. Did you notice, other than we humans (and few other conscious species) , every thing else just revolves - spinning around themselves and  around something else. Earth rotates around its own axis and then it rotates around the sun. Sun does the same . Moon goes around the same way - around itself and then around the earth. Even the sub atomic particles do the same. Even the quarks - Angular and orbital momentum is the only thing that leads to all the interactions in this manifested universe. But we digress - lets focus our `Senses` on the `Senses` themselves :-) 

# Senses

There are five primary SENSES `Indriyas`  of a conscious agent - HUMAN and most of the four legged animals that roam the earth. Other species may have less or more senses. For example trees have only one sense - that of touch. Irrespective of how many senses and how we define them - the primary purpose of the senses is to consume the information. They are receptors of information and the only way to do this is to engage with the manifestations. As we noted earlier in "Getting Started" that manifestations are nothing but information. The food that you ate in lunch today is nothing but information that you consumed through your senses of taste, smell and sight. You could tell with your sight New York Style Pizza that you ate this afternoon is different from the Domino's regular thin crust one and it just smelled great. And of course it melted in your mouth .. This information - received through three senses - creates a visual - a placeholder for the Pizza in our mind - Such a visual is called `Dhriti`. Pizza is just a trivial example. The idea of `Dhriti` is our ability to restrain our senses so as to sustain information. Yogies train their senses to stay focused on a specific manifestation. The constant vigil of senses on a specific `dhriti` (or a group of them) is what forms an opinion - `Dhaarna`. In reference to `Dhayana` - if your `Dhayana` is focused on say `Pizza` - the idea that New York Pizza just dissolves in the mouth is a `Dhaarna`. `Dhaarna` is very specific to you. I may feel that New York Style Pizza makes a mess on my plate as well as in my mouth. 

> In essence `Vritti` is your natural response to a specific sensory observation. `Dhriti` is your ability to hold your focus on one of such `Vrittis` on demand. Being able to see how you respond to a situation (before or after) is a very useful tool to   help form our opinions - `Dharana`. 

Just like the `Vritti` - that's is your specific decrypted knowledge of the basic games (emotions) - the way you roll - the way you act, `Dhritis` are basic forms of information blocks that our senses retain even when we are not in touch with the manifestation. `Dhritis` lead to `Dhaarna` - a topic of particular interest in `Dhyana`. `Manan` is focusing on some topic to evaluate your `Dharna` v/s other opinions such that you could reason your position v/s others. Where others are coming from ? Once we do that , we lose unnecessary passion for "our" ideas v/s them. In a way we start seeing the things for their worth - An important pre-requisite for `Chintan` - your design as well as the action plan. Continuing with our `Dhyana` on the "New York Style Pizza`. If you consider my opinion , you may agree that it does make a mess while it still tastes great in the mouth !


Broadly speaking - `Dhritis` are the primary control over senses .It is what lends us observation and focus. They are the perceptions that lead to opinions. 

## A Book vs A Movie

Before we look at the "senses" in detail, there is one more important point to establish - where does the fickle mind comes from - the `Chanchal Mana`. If you picked up a big book on say quantum mechanics from your library - a somewhat labor intensive topic, you will find ypurself jumping from one chapter to another. You wanna check the bredth and the depth. You even consider if I should really spend time on this ? You basically want to check everything that the book offers before you really get down to serious reading. You might even check the back ground of the authors. The reviews. You move from page five to fifty one and then back to page ten. Gradually the thing start shaping up . It is never sequential. In fact , it is not a bad thing because you have limited time and it makes sense to make sure that it is worth investing on a long read . Fickleness is thus a judicious way to maximize the return on your investments. 

A movie has a different delivery. Once you start, you are caught into the audio visual experience. You rarely fiddle with the remote to go forward and back. You can do it but you don't because flipping  the scenes in a movie is not as easy as flipping the pages on the book. You take your only shot at the movie and end up forming a "quick opinion" at the end. Either it is good or a waste of time. 

Now imagine you are in a game - "Call of Duty" ..every time you play with bunch of friends, the way it happens is always different. More the players , more complex it is to roll back. And there is absolutely no way to move foreward without actually playing the game.  How do you ascertain if it was a good use of your time. You must retain the information of important moves to go back over. That's where `Dhriti` comes in. You have the ability to run the game (or the movie) back in your mind to review your opinions. After the game , if you invest some time in `Manan` - you might find why others are falling head over heels for the `Titanic` while you thought it was just a time pass. 

In real life, a game that is order or magintude more complex than the "Call of Duty" , `Manan` is thus the only way to ascertain if you opinions hold water. What if you never take time out to perform a ritualistic rview ? What if you keep taking pictures and never go back to see them ? Do you think you can find the right path ?

## Five elements `Panch Bhoota` - five senses

A SENSE explores variations in one unique `Tattva` - the Element and it is the primary mechanism to invoke a perception for the associated `Vrittis` - perceptions related to the specific sense. The elements represent `Prakriti` the "Intelligence". There are five innate elements - `Panch Bhoota`. 

Let us not confuse these ELEMENTS with the chemical elements such as Oxygen or Carbon. The chemical elements are based on number of electrons they have to understand their electro-chemicals properties. The ELEMENTS `Bhootas` described in Gita is a different way to categorize. Just as we can categorize the population by gender or orientation or by ethnicity or by countries. 


### Skin (Touch - `Sparsha`) - Earth

Touch explores variations in the texture of SURFACE. SURFACE is represented by solids  and thus by EARTH `Prithvi` . Earth is the element linked to Chakra of `Mooldhara`. Beyond obvious perception of touch , it contols four `Vrittis `  - Extreme joy, natural pleasure, delight in controlling passion, and blissfulness in concentration. 

You have probably seen animals rolling in the mud to express the natural pleausre. On the opposite side of specturm, there is delight in holding the passion and concentrating. 

### Toungue (Taste - `Rasa`) - Water 

Tougue is the only part of the body that can tell the difference in taste. The "taste" is enabled by the liquids `Rasa`and thus WATER `Jala` represents its eleement. The water is linked to the second `Chakra` - known as `Swadhisthana`.  The six petals of this `Chakra` represent the following modes of consciousness: affection, pitilessness, feeling of all-destructiveness, delusion, disdain, and suspicion. `Svadishtana` is often associated with pleasure, sense of oneself, relationships, sensuality and procreation. It is blocked by Guilt. Svadhishthana is also associated with the unconscious and with emotion. It is closely related to the `Muladhara` in that `Muladhara` is where the different `samskaras` (potential Karmas) lie dormant, and `Svadhishthana` is where these `Samskaras` find expression. `Svadhishthana` contains unconscious desires, especially sexual desire. Thus, in addition to sense of taste (the tongue) it is linked with reproduction (the genitals).


### Eyes (Vision - `Drishti) - Fire

Eyes explore variations or different shades of LIGHT. Nature produces the medium of light through element -FIRE `Agni`. In traditional `Hathyoga` the Chakra for fire is `Manipura` that comes with the vrittis of spiritual ignorance, thirst, jealousy, treachery,
shame, fear, disgust, delusion, foolishness and sadness.

Manipura is considered the center of dynamism, energy, will power and achievement, which radiates prana throughout the entire human body. It is associated with the power of fire and digestion, as well as with the sense of sight and the action of movement. Through meditating on Manipura, one is said to attain the power to save, change or destroy the earth (living soil).  Being related to the sense of sight, it is associated with the eyes, and being associated with movement, it is associated with the feet.


### NOSE (Smell - `Gharan`) - Air 

The variations in SMELL `ghrana are enabled by the AIR. If there is no AIR there is no smell.  The `Chakra` related to air is `Anahta`. The `vrittis` of this Chakra are
-  1. asha: wish, desire, hope
-  2. chinta: thoughtfulness, anxiety
-  3. chesta: effort
-  4. mamta: possessiveness, fondness
-  5. dhamba: arrogance, vanity
-  6. viveka: discrimination
-  7. vikalata: languor
-  8. ahamkara: conceit, egoism, pride
-  9. lolata: covetousness, avarice
-  10. kapatata: duplicity, hypocrisy
-  11. vitarka: indecision, argumentativeness
-  12. anutapa: regret, burning misery

### Ears - Space

Like two dish antennas, ears are always open to observe the variations in the sound of SPACE. SPACE is the fifth element called `Aakasha`. The Chakra for space is `Vishudha` .  This chakra is known as the purification center. In its most abstract form, it is associated with higher discrimination and is associated with creativity and self-expression. When `Vishuddha` is closed, a person undergoes decay and death. Just like ears , when it is open, negative experiences are transformed into wisdom and learning. The success and failure in one's life are said to depend upon the state of this chakra, whether it is polluted or clean. In addition to the  element Akasha, or Ether, and the sense of hearing, this `Chakra` is related to the action of speaking.


>> So five SENSES of conscious agents to measure variations of the MEDIUMS of five Elements. In other words - five Sensors to calibrate five Fields. The collection of these five fields is CONSCIOUSNESS FIELD. We can't observer anything that's not described by sight , touch , taste, smell or space. This, however, doesn't mean there is nothing beyond our senses. There is whole lot more beyond our sense observable universe.

# Communication
- Senses can communicate to conscious agents. Communication is NOT limited to one conscious agent. My eyes can see a snake at your back and communicate to you instantaneously. Or after processing the information, my conscious agent can communicate to yours verbally. 
- Ability to communicate is as fundamental as the measurement itself. Most of the communication is non verbal. Eyes communicate so do the ears by turning red. Skin glows. All sorts of smells send messages. 
- Thus observations and sharing the observations is the fundamental way our conscious agent indulge with nature. 
- Through communication we create a shared universe. The complexity of universe increases order of magnitude more with sharing. Thus Gita recommends solitude `Ekanta`. 
- Every time a sense communicates to other conscious agent we indulge in something known as `sangdosha` - the sin of attaching with others. 

# Duality
- Based on the direct observations (or communicated ones), conscious agent needs to decide if there is a change in the intensity of field. If there is no change, there is no action needed.
- By design, observation creates DUALITY. Every observation has the question in-built into it - `is there a change ?` - Yes or No. If `Yes` , do I need to act ? `Yes or No`. Duality gives rise to INTELLIGENCE `Buddhi`.
- It is debatable if the `duality` is the reason of observations or the variations in sense fields create duality. The goal `Moksha` is to get over the duality. If there is no duality, we are just `one`. There is whole lot of scriptures dedicated to this topic - `adwitwad vs Dwaitvaad`
- If action is to be taken then what action? And a whole list of sub-activities.

# Time 

- The notion of time `Kala` is the effort conscious agent takes to create an action plan. Once all the details are filled in, manifestation is instantaneous. Think of it as if we are writing a program. The time is taken in writing the code , compiling and may be debugging it. And to accommodate the change requests. Once the code is final and made into a binary, it hardly takes any time to run and manifest the intended outcome. 
- The way each program spawns its own universe at run time,  Krishna says, I do all the work by spawning the universe required for the action plan.
- Conscious agents feel continuity of time `Kal chakra` because before an action plan is frozen they move on to interpreting more sense observations. And they keep changing the action plan. 

# Krishna and Gita

- The question that haunts new `yogies` is who is Krishna ? In chapter 10 verse 20 , Krishna says
 
>> `ahem atma gudakesa, sarv bhootasya sthitah ; ahem adishch madhyam cha, bhootanam antev cha!` - Means I am the `atma` in every being. I am in the center of them. I was their beginning as well as their end. 

- Thus the constitution of each conscious agent is Krishna surrounded by five sensors. The sensory inputs can have Krishna do the work but nature of observation give rise to duality and thus INTELLIGENCE. 
- So we can say a conscious agent has three fundamental parts - The senses, the Mind and the Soul.
- This is the core difference between science and spirituality. Science thinks we have only senses and mind though newer discoveries are pointing the science to existence of something more. However, science and Gita are NOT at odds for both are experimental. 
- Science wants experimental proof and Gita mandates `sakshatkara` - physical meeting with krishna and it provides a solid framework to achieve that. This framework has nothing to do with popular religion or dogma.
- Gita is experiential. If you are willing to invest time, it will get you what you been looking for - the answers to many questions that even scientific framework is unable to answer. This includes but is not limited to physical comforts, peace and success.
- In fact, Gita will make you a better scientist :-)

# Manifestation

- The centerpiece of Gita is to understand that all manifestation is done by Krishna. Krishna being the vast consciousness from where all conscious agents emanate and a tiny piece of that is in every being. This separation is ONLY to substantiate our notion of SPACE. We will discover later that there is no physical separation. Everything is connected. The difference is only what a conscious agent is focused on to observe. Observation is the key for our universe is as small (or as vast) as we observe.
- Conscious agents get sensory inputs as soon as they (the senses) come in contact with their respective element. And then we process the information in terms of acceptance of change in conditions and then our INTELLIGENCE cast an action plan. This is the TIME. The moment plan is complete i.e knowledge is complete, the creation happens automagically. A vast super conscious system provides all the resources and manifestation happens. There is no time taken in creation. 
- Thus the work, as we perceive, is only knowing how the things are done. Once we know exactly how, everything can be automated. There is no human effort. Or zero man hour spent. This is for the things that we humans do but there are infinitely large activities already automated. For example rain is required for growing food for billions of people and feeding animals. There is no human effort needed. There is no human effort involved in seed becoming a tree. The effort is only deciding what to grow, where to grow and when to grow and myriad of other decisions that we conscious agents take. The better and complete our knowledge, there will be no physical work for us. 
- Thus we can say manifestation is automated. If not 100% , may be 99.999999 % . Don't you agree ?
- In Krishna's world everything moves as prescribed. Earth goes around the Sun. Sun goes around the massive black hole at the center of of our milky way. And we call it evolution. But in our world a pin doesn't move till I move it. A word doesn't get typed on it's own. Isn't that funny ?
- The reason is simple. Our knowledge is imperfect in many spheres. Where ever we reach perfection we automate it. A car runs with the press of a button. That is NOT evolution. That is automation. Why is it so hard for us to accept that our universe is hugely automated cause of superior automation that is beyond our understanding ?

# `Karm Yoga`


- Thus all the focus is on a ritualistic approach to acheiving perfection in your prescibed or chosen act - `Yajna and Karma`. Perfection to an extent that we just enjoy the work without even looking at the fruits of work. 
- Krishna says that this can be done in two ways - `Sanyasa` - renunciation or `Prema` - eternal love. Also called `Bhakti Yoga`. However , he says, that path of renunciation is very difficult. In this path `Karm Yogi` is easily fooled by the matrix and he falls again and again after enjoying the fruits of `Yajna`. The focus in this path is on excellence of the skills to attain perfection of knowledge. He adds that though dwellers of this path win over Fear , Anger and Jealousy but they are often swallowed by Pride in their pefection. This leads to their fall. 
- The other path, that of `Prema or Bhakti` is comparatively easier. , he says. In this path, you need to admire the way I work. Make every resource available. He goes on to show his `virat roopa` to Arjuna to show him that all the work that he thinks is to be done by him ie killing his brethern and teachers , has already been done by Krishna. Not even Arjuna's enemies , but people on his side are also dying and entering his immense jaws. The idea is that you marvel at his expanse. He says that I am the fire in Sun. I am the desires. I am the intelligence. Just see me and understand me. When you focus on me, you are solely focused on me, you will no longer be bonded by the the outcomes of your `Karma`. Thus your knowledge will easily reach perfection. Such Karm Yogies are happy and they are rarely impacted by the bugs of nature. And they are saved from the curse of pride `Ahenkaara` too. 
- If all your focus is on `How he works` , then you will easily win over the duality of INTELLIGENCE because, you are spending no time on the sensory observations. You will appear a mystic to the world. You will know everything that is knowable and you will indulge in your `Karma` joyfully. Being one with me allows you comfort in `Karmyoga`. 
- Thus wether you take `sanyasa` or `Prema` you still will do your `Yazna` ie pefecting your knowledge but later is more natural way of doing things. In this path you will find me by your side. Always. I shall own your actions for you are directed by me. 
- This knowledge, that is exposed on you through knowing and adoring me is `jnaana`  - The real knowledge. He adds that even `Sanyasa` will lead you to this conclusion.



- There are four different categories of the conscious agents. 
- The first is those who engage with senses and seek pleasure in such engagements. Let's call them sense driven. Such people don't cumulate resources and whatever they inherit they spend in sense gratification. These people are obviously poor but they are happy in their indulgences. Gita calls such people `Shoodras` because they suffer in serving other conscious agents and feel exploited. 
- The second category is those who cumulate resources and trade them for sense gratification. These people work hard and play hard. Gita calls them `Vaishyas`. These people soon start cumulating more and more and thus suffer from greed and lust. 
- The third category is the ones who control their senses and resources to accomplish something bigger. They seek gratification through legacy. These people lead , create new, build huge. They amass communities around them. They wield power and lead other conscious beings. Gita calls theme `Khshtriyas`. 

The Notion of Time - KaalChakraa
Senses have dual role - To observe the nature and to commuicate with other conscious beings. 
Since ears are always open to the space they also act as the primary Sense in all animals with five senses. That's the reason MUSIC is the most evolved means to set the mood. We will know about moods later. For now suffice to know that hearing is primary sense in both say humans and dogs but dogs; after hearing something focus with smell. Humans on the other hand focus with eyes. For most part we decide Yes or NO to act on the sensory inputs with nose. In some cases such as eating we deploy nose. Dogs take the call with nose and very rarely deploy their eyses. That is the reason your dog can't see you talking on iPhone but they can hear. Then they try to smell and when they dont find you smell they think their mind is playing tricks. And they sit down in vain. Since vision works for us , we have developed technology to broadcast sound and video but we don't care abount the smell. This itself is putting rest of the animal world at an disadvantage. 
