<center><h1>5.2</h1></center>

## Doubt - `Sanshaya`. 

Let us say , you woke up in the middle of the night - in a room with all the windows closed . And no watches or cell phones. You might wonder how is it outside ? Day or night ? The room has hidden the truth from you. As long as something is hidden , there needs to be a place for speculation or guesstimate. This place is called "doubt" - `Sanshya`. Our ability to speculate different possibilities is what we know as "Reason". With reason we comprehend the shape of "Truth". "Truth" is what exists outside the room. It is hidden to our senses. What if "Truth" is hidden in open. They say the best way to hide is to be part of the crowd. Subtle and unnoticeable. What if "Truth" is so subtle that our senses just ignore it as "unimportant" from survival standpoint. What if the "broad day" outside is also another construct of our senses? What if the survival itself is a "doubt" ?

Let us build this logic little more ..

### Reason

If you ever travelled in a train, particularly a Swiss train- the thing is so stable that you can leave a glass of water without ever spilling it even if you are climbing the Alps. If you see outside the train, you see the trees running in opposite direction while you feel stationary your self. Thanks to the train being so quiet and shake free, you see from the window that trees outside are moving but you can reason that trees are stationary while the train is moving. Just like when you woke up (in the middle of the night) , you saw everything is dark but you could reason it was broad day light outside. Can you trust your senses ? 

Let us now use the same faculty of mind - the "reason"  to see why every manifestation we perceive is dualistic - there is at least one more scenario v/s the truth it carries - our perception of "Truth".   We can perceive many probable version of truth. Many of them so not true that we can discard with "reason". Some of them might exist as possibilities for "reason" can take you only so far. You can speculate you slept at 11 PM and you normally sleep say six hours, so it is likely 5 am a summer sun is trying to break in. But you will know only when you "act" to go check it yourself. "Reason" clubbed with "Actions" is our magic box to reconcile our perception with the "Truth". Can "Actions" take us beyond sensory perceptions ? 

> "Reason" is a faculty of "Intelligence" - `Chitta` to discard many many obvious lies. Not to hide the `Truth". And then give us an "action plan" to reconcile our perception with "Truth". We do it all the time. 

So here is the "Truth" .. 

Manifestation is the final iteration of the `Yajna`. You may recall from previous chapters that manifestation itself is information. Information, by design, is something that can be "informed" to the senses. Which means, the broader aspect of knowledge is always hidden (encrypted) in the manifestations. Which means there is always room for speculation and a "journey of actions" to reconcile our perceived reality with the "Truth". Since every manifestation has a full copy of knowledge , you can start the journey from anywhere. You can focus on the breeze , the flowing river , the operating system , the app , the smart phone , the dog ..Only thing you should not focus on is a "Cat". Because cats are Cats :-) .. You get the point - Actions are the only way to dispel the "Doubt". It is immaterial if you are building next "Google" or you are mopping the floors. The nature of work is trivial v/s the work itself. So you can set aside at least one doubt - what should I do ? You can do anything - meditation , pranayama , coding , serving - it is the actions that will break you to the "Truth" if that is what you are seeking. Consistent actions - without letting the desires open another can of worms - another layer of doubts. 

> Doubt is inbuilt into every observation (of a manifestation) simply because our senses can't consume the knowledge. Thus we must create a placeholder for the knowledge. A version that we think is the closest representation of the Truth. But that is just the beginning. We then need to create an action plan and indulge in "Actions" as a ritual. And then wait for the "Truth" to grow from a seed to a massive tree. It does.  Once you trigger it, it is chain reaction. New branches show up. It starts driving further actions. New leafs , new flowers and new fruits of `Karm Yoga`. 

Just like removing fickleness is essential to stabilize the mind, appreciation and careful analysis of the "doubts" is a requirement for stabilising the intelligence. In fact , `Yajna` is nothing but a trial and error of various doubts selected upon careful reasoning. Let us go back to the baseball - you think you can hit the ball for a home run if you shifted your weight to the front foot while taking a wild swing .. You must dispel all the doubts on this strategy. That is the only way to make yourself do it wholeheartedly. Afterwards you may find that it didn't work. And then you choose the next strategy. And so on with the next and the next practice scenario till you actually hit the homerun. And even then you need to repeat it many times over to make sure all the remaining doubts are set aside. Even Truth needs to be practiced !

### Fear 

By design we reason first (and most) the extreme situations because such doubts are even easier to comprehend. They are easy placeholders and our focus always shifts to extremes. We wonder about the "Big Bang" and "Big End" . Even in a family the focus is either on the "Youngest" or on the "Oldest". They are the most talked about people. We honour extreme examples of courage and we despise extreme cases of cowardice. 

Fear is generated from such unresolved doubts that are generally extreme and least probable but are detrimental to our Identity but are detrimental to our Identity. We will talk about ID in later paragraphs. Suffice to know here that ID is the thing you are fighting to keep alive. Survival is all about the ID. Once fear kicks in, it is almost impossible to go beyond our ID. 

>Fear is the jail. Once caught, our focus can't get to the Truth of the situation. 

## Interface

Every manifestation - water , air , earth , refrigerator or the apps on your smart device - all of them must provide an interface so that the manifestation could be perceived by the senses. Interface is a layer that allows the senses to get a feel for the manifestation without you having to go through the practice to understand the knowledge. Refrigerator has a very simple interface. It allows you to set the temperature and place the things in it to cool them down. You don't need a PhD in thermo dynamics to cool your leftover Pizza. If however you are interested to know more about the cooling machine, you can speculate as to how the damn thing works. One of the plausible way is to think that someone has stored lots of ice in the back of the fridge. You can reason that if that was to be true , there must be someone replacing the ice every couple of hours but you see no one walking past your kitchen with a bag of ice on their shoulders. And in that case why would someone plug the machine into an electrical socket. If you are hell bent on figuring out the mechanism, you will soon dispel such doubts. May be a good starting point is to search the you tube on "How Fridge Works". It might bring you close to an idea of compressor. You get the point - the knowledge is endless. 

> Interface is just a starting point .. 

The weird thing about the interface is, it has already created a separation - you now perceive refrigerator as a separate machine. A machine that your senses could feel and use to deliver some value and in addition if you are curious, it allows to create a placeholder for knowledge - "Doubt" - in your mind. 

The duality is the difference between your version of Truth (doubt) and how does the manifestation actually works. There are only two possibilities here. If you have many theories as to how a manifestation could work , then you need to zero on one , to initiate learning action.  In essence , intelligence is reductive. It creates very many probable scenarios and breaks them into ever smaller routines. And then it makes us iterate through each in pursuit of decrypting the knowledge. The problem is if we attach expectations , they , clubbed with fickle mind further extend the doubts. "Doubt" and "fickleness" feed on each other. They never let you take the next step in your ritual. You move from one plan to another - endlessly ; always lost in the interface. 

> In essence - Actions are the way you reconcile your version (doubt) with the Truth. Since every manifestation has complete knowledge with it, it doesn't matter where you start from.

### APIs

The "Ritual of Actions" is thus digging below the "interface". The first thing you discover that you can get a lot done by calling the APIs. You really don't need to click the mouse all the time. Twitter APIs let you tweet you from anywhere. The usage of APIs, in itself is a testament that you now better understand the manifestation. Can we call the core manifestations such as Air through APIs. Air has many features. In addition to being the necessary part of combustion with in our cells , we use Air to communicate through speech . As we saw in the last chapter - the speech is secondary communication to clean up the mess of our real time outbursts. What if we used the same API to create a new narrative that has nothing to do with reality - can we sing ? Can we tell the stories ? Turns out we do all the time - why ? Because we have perfected the `Yajna`  of speech `Vani` as compared to other species. The speech and the language is one of our most powerful manifestation where we use Air seamlessly - just like you can tweet from the notification panel of your Mac. In fact , we use all the basic elements - a variant of the fire digests the food in our belly ; there is a little combustion engine that uses water, air and earth (food) in our cells to create what we know as the biological energy. 

### Connection 

As we decrypt the knowledge - means we move from the interface to the APIs and then the underlying code itself, we get connected to the knowledge. Everything that sees one truth, is essentially one because there is no notion of duality . The big question is if at cellular and organ levels we are already connected with the knowledge of the five core elements then why and how we feel that we are a separate entity ? If my `Chakras` are all rotating based on the design than what keeps me awake at night ? Why don't I have access to the peace ? Why am I caught in the doubts ? In the cycles of happiness and pain .. 

That is because we identify ourselves beyond our body .. 

Hmm  .. The question then is who am I ? And what do you mean by Identity ?

### ID 



## Duality as depicted in `Hath Yoga`

`Hath Yoga` may seem empirical but it is a useful tool to explain the nature of our reality to one who believes in it. I am not a practitioner but I just marvel at the extensive thinking that must have gone into it. Someone really thought throug the entire scheme before coming out with this model. 

If you see fig 3 in last chapter, `Kundalini` represents intelligence and it lies folded (like a snake) in the `Mooldhara Chakra`. That is where all the `Samskara` - The basic values , stay dormant. Thus intelligence can easily decrypt the basics to give you what we call your `Svabhava` - your nature. In normal person, it rises to next `Chakra` by adolecence . The puberty and setting up the sexual desires. Taking the `Kundalini` above the second `Chakra` is difficult.  For most people `Kundalini` stays in botttom two `Chakras`. 

As a representation of duality , `Bindu` - The focus ( doubtless state) resides in the top `Chakra` named `Sahsrara`. `Bindu` is the kind of a focal point of observation. In a way, it is to say that we indulge in such `Vrittis` where we take the focal spotlight. Thus there are two ways to realize effectiveness - either keep the Bindu in top `Chakra` or raise the `Kundalini` to the top ; for a healthy blissful life. 

As per `Hathyoga Pradeepika` -  the 101 of `Tantra` , of these two paths,  in the early part of the life, intelligence is too occupied in decrypting the basic values that trying to take it to the top `Chakra` is futile. In addition, during this time , the focus falls to `Manipura` - the third Chakra from bottom and burns in digestion which means we are too much focused on food. The leftover focus goes down to `Swadhisthana` the second `Chakra` which means intense focus of eating and procreation. Thus the book suggests to hold the focus in higher `Chakras` in early parts of the life. It suggests various `Mudras` and `Mantras` for accomplishing this. 

If you fail to hold the focus in head in  the first part of life  then the second option for you (in later part of the life) is to raise the `Kundalini` to the top. Having developed your intellect, later part of the life is best suited for this endeavour. Again , `Pradeepika` provides many `Mudras` and `Mantras` for this. The ultimate goal is to bring get knowledge and intelligence together situated in the head to end the "Duality".


## Matrix

Duality in itself is not bad. In fact it fuels the reason and makes us try different options to perfect our rituals. The question is how does it (along with fickle mind) turn into Matrix - `Maya`.

>Matrix is as old as the knowledge - means there is no end or no beginning of Maya. Matrix is so prevelent that  concious agents start confusing it with `Prakriti` - the intelligence. 

In Hindi , `Maya` literally means money but it represents a large system of millions of concious constituents. Using example of a large is the most accessible way for me to highlight some of the constructs of Matrix. 

### User Interface 

Imagine you are tasked  to build a UI for an application. The very purpose of User Interface to manage the needs of the users. A user logging into Twitter may think that the application is "only" the User Interface but nothing can be far from the truth (side note - Twitter is a data science  app where human slaves happily spend their only currency - time , to train the machines get better at data mining) . New developers too  sometimes  make this mistake. They start designing the application from the user interface. The truth is application is lot more than the UI. User Interface is the last piece to help users consume the application. Building an application with UI in mind is not a bad idea but if all you are thinking is the UI , you can not build any thing new . You will simply replicate that you have already seen because application is necessarily to solve a problem that you feel in your experience. You do a Yajna to manifest a solution for yourself. And the left over (manifested information) can be used by others. A slight improvement in UI can possibly help others. That is where User Interface comes. 

# ID

Let us say you have a global app like Instagram that was built to easily share pictures. Now you want to enable entire world to leverage the tools you built. Each user needs to manage their own pics. You need to relate the pics of each user to them. That means you must identify the user. The user interface demands an ID. 

>>>>There is no way to serve you your choices unless I know who you are !

If you use git , you know what is the application. It solves the problem of managing the versions (tracking the gradual decryption of knowledge). Github is a user interface over git. 

> ID is not a bad thing but it has aftereffects. 

# Matrix

Let us say you wrote a script to do something. It took elaborate curiosity, intelligence and actions to build it. On the way you decrypted a piece of knowledge and you are at peace. Thing is so perfect that now you don't even need to think. Yajna is complete. Manifestation is registered. It is end to end automated. 

## Machine 

What if you want it to automatically start at a certain time. You wrote another script to schedule it, another small `yajna` to understand the scheduler. Now you add both the manifestations. They are self starting manifestations joined back to back. You just made a "Machine"

You can weave thousands of tiny machines to make as big a machine as you want. A machine takes in commands and delivers an information. In a way it is the transformation of information without having to apply thinking or actions. So you can use machines to get to a specific set of information. It helps to get to your `Yajna` quickly. 

The knowledge inside the machine is totally encrypted to you. Even how the information reshapes from inputs to outputs ; is opaque. More complex the machine , more magical it is. 

You thought your friends will be benefited by your little complex machine, you passed on the code and commands. 

The thing is beautiful. 

Note - machines - complex machines --> consumption of consumption ---> Suddenly the knowledge becomes the most hidden thing -- > Awaken -- Action.
## Service 

Then you came up with an idea to let it go to the masses. You share your resources to help other people. You get to perform your `yajna` many times over and you help people. 

## ID

Then you started keeping a record of what all people need and how and when you can help them. You created your conscious agents. 

## User Interface 

If you know it , why not let people see it. You build a simple user interface . All the information about everyone is visible to all. You also created the senses (touch or mouse or audio) and trained people with the new senses. Yes , we acquire many senses beyond basic five .. 

## Privacy

Then you were asked to keep everyone's information separate from each other and let them see only their information. 

>You just built Matrix. 

# What is wrong with the matrix ?

Nothing. There is nothing wrong with Twitter or Facebook. Or the monetary system. You just triggered a race among your conscious agents. Your service has a some surival or pleasure value to the users. That is the reason they are there in the first place. As soon as something is hidden , it means we are allowing users to speculate. Speculation builds reasons to justify your position v/s [unknown] Truth. This is the birth of "Duality and Reason". These two fuel the Matrix. 

>>It doesn't matter if the speculation is same as the Truth. As long as Truth is unknown there must be a placeholder for speculation. 

That is the reason user interface it self is Dualistic. There is male and female, East - West , Left -Right . Opposites exists for everything. 

## Matrix Hides

## Mechanics of Matrix 

Matrix acts in a subtle fashion . Means its rise is gradual. 

As we have seen, Matrix puts a veil on Truth to create speculation among conscious agents. Speculation leads to Reason (what if scenarios) , Reason leads to Doubt - `Sanshya` ; and "Doubt" clubbed with "Desires" (fundamental of all bugs) , creates "fickle mind" - `Mana`. The primary purpose of `Mana` is to render your "Intelligence" - `Budhi` dormant so that you are consumed in sensory pleasures. 

Now you know the design of Facebook :-) 

As your intelligence goes dormant, the knowledge in stays fully encrypted but you can easily be automated. You  become part of the matrix. 

>>>>>> Gita says this is the sleeping stage of conscious agent. 


# Concious Agent 

A concious agent is born in the matrix because the ID services of thousands if matrix applications finally shape up concious agent. In a way a concious agent is manifested because of relentless `Yajna` of Maya. Thus concious agent too has a fully encryted copy of knowledge as well as it inherits the five bugs. 

These bugs lead the conscious agent to take consume the matrix. Desire is a precursor for curiosity. Anger is a precursor to `Yajna`. 

From Gita's stand point - such a conscious agent is in "slept" state inside the matrix. Nishkaam Yajna is the way to know your self and become awakened conscious agent. 

You don't leave the matrix. You are just aware of all the knowldge spread into every single machine of matrix. Thus you can bend the matrix the way you want. 

Awakened conscious agents are like the light bulbs lighting up in the mesh of Maya. 

## A universe in itself .. 

In a way a concious agent is complete embodiment of the universe  because it has all elements of Yajna (knowledge to decrypt and ability to act)  and all the bugs of the Matrix. It has tools to seek knowledge and at the same time tools (the bugs) to indulge in Matrix. It all depends where the concious agent is looking at - If she is looking at the matrix - as per Gita, she is sleeping. If it is looking at knowledge then it is awakened. 

Krishna says - This human body itself is the true field - `Kshetra`. Knowing your Truth is knowing the entire meta-physical world. 

# Consciousness 

Now imagine the this huge app - mother of all apps - the reality- The Matrix. Let us try to build a user interface for it .. 

>>>> Consciousness is simply the ability (of a concious agent) to interact with the Matrix. 

We know our users have curiosity `Mana` , they also have intelligence `Buddhi` and we just gave them an ID - Ability to "Reason" a Speculation v/s Truth . But what is the use of interface if they don't have means to interact with it. Apple had to create a mouse so that you can interact with the graphical interface. And later the touch interface . It seems now we are all now moving to the audio interface with Alexa. And long before all this was the text based interface that we call command line. 

How about we give some gestures to our users  .. 

>>>>> Senses are the tools that enable us to interact with the UI --> Matrix ---> Giant Machine with fully encrypted knowledge. 

Humans have five primary senses. Most other mammals too. But it is not necessary to have only five. Fish have only three senses. Trees have only one - touch. 

# Getting back to the humans 

Five senses, along with Curiosity , intelligence and Ego (Reason) is what makes a Conscious Agent 

Gita calls it `Ashtdhamool Prakriti` - means the eight basic parts of the universal manifestation. 

Let us spend some time on the senses.




# Notes 

# Duality
- Based on the direct observations (or communicated ones), conscious agent needs to decide if there is a change in the intensity of field. If there is no change, there is no action needed.
- By design, observation creates DUALITY. Every observation has the question in-built into it - `is there a change ?` - Yes or No. If `Yes` , do I need to act ? `Yes or No`. Duality gives rise to INTELLIGENCE `Buddhi`.
- It is debatable if the `duality` is the reason of observations or the variations in sense fields create duality. The goal `Moksha` is to get over the duality. If there is no duality, we are just `one`. There is whole lot of scriptures dedicated to this topic - `adwitwad vs Dwaitvaad`
- If action is to be taken then what action? And a whole list of sub-activities.
- There are as many shades in a color as many colors on the pallet. Means if you are a part of categorized list , then all those categories live in you as well. Their percentages may vary but you essentially represent every other category as any other category does. Thus seeing the truth is difficult. 
- Duality lives in the information. Knowledge is just one. Karm Yoga is a way to be one with knowledge so that you can see only True version of information. Means single Truth. 
- You may say it is a circular self fulfilling prophecy - 
- Duality is not all bad - one of the thing that duality offers is you can latch on to a `Guru`. In traditional `Hath Yoga` the `Chakra` between your eyes - with two petals is what represents duality. A `Guru` touches this place and removes duality . That is the reason , this Chakra is also called `Agya` - the order. In a way it is to say you are outsourcing the thinking part (manan and chintan) to your `Guru` and all you are going to do is follow the orders `Agya` to engage in the actions. In traditional Hindu rituals , when men used to go to war, the women used to put a `Tilak` to men between the eyes. The idea was that leave your duality with us , go win the war with a single purpose of winning. 
