<center><h1> Chapter 7.0</h1></center>

Very few things that both religion and science agree on is - "Change is the only permanent thing". Religion has a caveat though - It says that God is immutable. Before we look at the "Change". Before we reconcile this difference, let us look at an important aspect of our reality .. 

## The interface

You are probably reading this text on a beautiful user interface of your smart device. Some of you, who still lug around a bulky laptop for work, may be reading it on the Windows UI. Windows 10 is pretty good though Microsoft recently announced an all new interface in Windows 11 :-) . If you are a creative type, you might be using a Mac to read this in your shiny Safari . And then there are few Linux geeks who still use a command line interface to do all things. Yes, there are text browsers that can somehow render a web page without a drop of Java Script :-) Bottom line is - you need an interface to read something as simple or as complex as a web page. The type and nature of the interface doesn't really matter. The question is what exactly is the interface ? 

> Interface is the mechanism through which our senses interact with the manifestations. 

Let us expand our analogy a little more. The moment we open our eyes , what we see is the interface. A glorious three dimensional interface. Our ears, skin , nose - the senses other than the eyes , don't need a three dimensional interface but the perceptions we get through these senses - even the perception of the taste , is through an interface. Really ? 

You may argue that ears don't need an interface. You can say that the sound can simply get into our ears and then into our brains. Yes, it can but how do we differentiate the barking sound of a dog from that of cat purrs ? 

### The doubts and the interface. 

Interface is NOT one that observes. Observations are done by the senses. Interface is where we make sense of the things. If there was no auditory interface, the sounds or big bull dog and that of the tiny cat won't seem different to us. We wont be able to differentiate the taste of Napa red from that of Scotland fluids. We have a pre existing copy of the taste of coffee and that is what makes us distinguish it from the Darjeeling tea. 

In the last chapter, we understood that the "doubts" are our pre conceived notions that we check against reality through actions. Thus interface is a place where we match our "doubts" with the sensory inputs. You can look at a picture of Golden Gate Bridge and tell that it is different from the Brooklyn Bridge because you can match your eyes three dimensional input with the pre existing picture in your brain. It is also a place where make an assumption about the reality and take a call to test your presumption against reality. 

> Thus interface is NOT something external. It is with in us.

### Interface is full of noise. 

After a day's hard work, you decided to open the bottle of that Napa red , the costly one and sat down on your couch to watch something good. You click past the never ending list of titles on Prime Videos, nothing really matches the mood. You shuffle between Prime to Netflix to Hulu to HBO , and then something gets your attention. You click to read the abstract and may be watch a trailer. Why ? 

Because you have a unique presumption of this evening. May be you want to watch some action but with a mix of meaningful emotional drama and something intelligent though not crossing over to sci fi. The "Dark Knight" sounds perfect but you have already seen it though you have almost forgotten the story line. May be new Joker but that one seems bit too much psycho -ish. Okay, the point is - you are choosing one or may be two or max three titles out of thousands of options available to you online. 

The things that you want to indulge in are the things that matter from interface standpoint. Rest everything is noise. Another example - Let  us say you are driving on the freeway. Thousands of cars and Trucks are moving by your side. All you care is not to hit any of them. You don't really care if it is a car or a truck or plane. If we ensure you that your Tesla will never hit anything on the road , would you even notice what is going on on the road ? All that is noise. Billions of people living their lives, never criss crossing you , trillions of stars in the outer galaxy, millions of apps in the app store and everything that is out there - they all help make you what you are , but from "interface" standpoint, they are just noise. Don't get me wrong , that occasional Lamborghini on the road might catch your attention to inspire you but you rarely notice the things in this vast expanse. Yet, here we are with all those tiny twinkling stars in the night sky. Oh well , they helped you write a poem some twenty years back :-)

### A puddle of information 
It doesn't matter if you are looking at this page through Android UI or iOS , or on Mac or in a text Browser. The interface in your mind can match the sensory inputs that came into your brain through a set of actions or the noticeable things in the noise, with the pre existing notions. This is where we create our beautiful (or mundane) reality. A three dimensional visual box , a deep auditory pipe and flattish sense of touch and taste. The remarkable thing of interface is our ability to verify pan senses. For example, we may hear a sound and we can perceive that it is a train coming from distance and when we open our eyes we do see a train at a distance. Not an aeroplane. All this is good. 

> But we know for sure that senses can only observe information. We can't communicate knowledge thus "knowledge" is beyond senses and thus "knowledge" is beyond this very intricate interface. 


Gita says there are only two types of things ...

- One that change - `Kshr` - All of manifested universe is part of this 
- Other that never change - `Akshr` - The `Atma` [protected] knowledge is immutable. 

# You are The God

Specifically on this logic, if we assume religions are right, then we know for sure that Gita mandates no external God because `Atam` is you. That is a good news. 

The question still remains why change occurs in the manifested. To understand it , let us first see what exactly is manifested and how. 

# Manifestation

Manifestation is expansion of information. Information, by definition means something that can be informed. In other words it is something that can be experienced through senses. Everything that we can observe directly with our senses (or by enhancing our perception through tools) is essentially "information". As we saw in last section, information is `Shruti ` - something that can be heard ! Now of course we can read it or watch a video or even see face to face. A house is information. Clothes are information and so is a book. Everything is a `Shruti`. The Hindu scripture names few `shrutis` as the messages from kings and from the saints - Those were passed on a hearsay but broader definition is something that we can experience with the senses. 

On the other hand, knowledge is something that can only be experienced - it is beyond senses. It is beyond communication. Ask someone who creates a poem, sings a song or makes an airplane. An airplane is a manifestation. We can see it. But how it is created is so unique to the engineers who make it. You can't make a plane or music just by seeing a plane or a concert. You can't even read a book on automotive engineering and make a car . You need to engage in the action `Karma`. Practicing `Karma` as a ritual `Yajna` leads to the knowledge that eventually translates into the manifestation. Once something manifests - a meme, a joke , a rocket , a book or a poem - It becomes a `Shruti`. But the knowledge remains with the one who performed the `Yajna` as her `Smriti`. 

In a way the knowledge is like a little black hole in you. Even you can't see it with your senses. You really don't know how you hit the baseball so perfectly while others can't even connect. You have sure done ton of practice but what is in you to hit that ball is beyond you. Every one is, however, informed well when you hit the home run. That is a manifestation of home run. You can make it an NFT if you want :-)

At the same time you do want to tell them all about this thing. Words alone don't help - why not just sing that song. Why not fly a drone - The knowledge drives the urge to share. How you package the information to share is upto you. May be you are a master of words , or you are an engineer - the way you share is what you manifest - that other conscious agents could touch and feel. What you can't share is the knowledge. Your `smriti` dawns on you through `yajna` but stays with you. 

## Lifecycle of Manifestation

I guess a serialized list is the easiest way to communicate but the reader knows these things may occur out of order or might even overlap ..

- A desire takes birth  - `Icha`
- You take a vow to make it happen - `Sankalpa` - Starting of a `Kalpa`
    - You start the actions - Start of `Yajna`
    - Phase 1 - You gain tremendous knowledge. Every session is opening up new things - `Sattva`
    - Phase 2 - You have something already in you but you don't know how to communicate it. You are in constant struggle with in you if it should be revealed, if yes how ? Is album a right way or a single chart .  Or should I make it a concert ? Should I make it free or charge for it. Will others get advantage of my creation ? You spend a lot of time in this though you still continue to practice. The hopes are high. Ideas are good - Basically you spin on three legs. Enjoy/ decrypt the knowledge, figure out the shape of information , figure out the manufacturing process - `Treta`. 
    - Phase 3 - Knowledge is complete. Artifact is ready. Reveal the information or not - `Dwaper`
    - Phase 4 - Information is fully baked in , you automate the information dissemination - It could be home runs, a you tube video , millions of copies of the book you wrote, concerts - `Kali`.
- End of Actions - End of Yajna
- Desire is fulfilled - If the outcome was favorable - you are happy, otherwise it is a pain. 
- Information is consumed by the target conscious agents. It is stale , useless . A book on the shelf that you don't even care to dust. - End of `Kalpa`. 
- The knowledge is still in decrypted stage with you. You can see a many new possibilities that are hidden to others. You will need to gain more knowledge to realize those possibilities - hence a new desire. And start of next `Kalpa`
- And the cycle continues. 


You continue to decrypt the knowledge and manifest. Information keeps getting added till there are possibilities to decrypt the knowledge. You exit the game when the knowledge is fully decrypted - `Nirvana`. 

Information keeps on adding and keeps adding and getting stale. The stale information is all the unconscious universe we can observe but it is not current. These automated artifacts run our universe but we don't pay any attention. No one opens the refrigerator compressor to figure out how it cools as long as the damn thing works. All you care if the beers got chilled or not 

# Change 

Since conscious agents are continuously decrypting the knowledge and thus manifesting , the universe around us keep changing. Someone added a new planet to our information base couple years ago. We are adding black holes now on daily basis. Well new iPhone comes only once an year .. Better order on before they launch a new model :-)


Add pages

# Notion of time
# Expectations vs outcomes - The cyclic nature
# Yuga - When lifecycle applied to the collective consciousness. 
# Nishkaam Karma - Through Yajna - Nyaan Yoga
Random Karma as devotion - Bhakti Yoga

