<center><h1>Living the Dreams </h1></center>
<center>
<figure>
    <audio
       controls
       src="./livingTheDreams.mp3">
          Your browser does not support the
          <code>audio</code> element.
    </audio>
</figure>
<h2>Episode 3</h2>
</center>

Hearing our own voice knowing who we are and being able to say exactly what we feel.  What is Art, be it in a spoken word,  written word,  music or dance ; if we Express exactly what we are feeling that expression is an expression of truth and if you look at the epics,  in any art form , a  painting from Michel Angelo or the written word of Shakespeare , or the spoken words of Krishna ; we don't know if they are true or not , what we know is the artist depicted what exactly he felt.   It is his or her truth . The closer to the truth better is the artifact. 

So, how do we achieve that vicinity to our emotions,  our own voice that we are able to exactly articulate. Now, in modern day science, there are a number of studies done on the sleep cycle. They say we have four stages of sleep and the third of them being what we call REM sleep. This is the cycle,  roughly around two hours that we dream . And one of the theory of the sleep cycle is that at this stage our frontal cortex,  which is kind of the boss of the mind, he goes on vacation. So there is nothing to take inputs from the senses. So pretty much all our senses as well as our work organs  are paralysed. This is the time when all the stored memories, the `Smrities`, they have a free stage and the dance around, they swirl around to show you what they are. 

REM sleep is mandatory for our well being. Despite severe competition for survival, nature has prioritised REM sleep every day. And say if we deprive our mind of the REM sleep, we can hallucinate in the daylight , while we are awake. And there are many psychedelics that try to induce this cycle of hallucination or dreaming while you're wide awake.  

What if we could talk to all these memories while we are actually conscious!  Because when we wake up from sleep Or we get done with our psychedelic session, all those memories are lost, they become inaccessible. It's not that they are not there. But we can't really reach them. We don't know where they are, our mind doesn't know the address. So `Naad Yoga` is a  way to gradually start living your dreams but at the same time being able to catalogue them as regular memories. It's where our active survival oriented frontal cortex meets with our deep mind or `Chitta`. And the way we accomplish that is through intense focus on the sentences,  on the words and the context;  and then try to see  what our emotions are telling us;  trying to find our own voice - amidst the war,  amidst the chaos,  amidst the change,  and the life .

We will talk about how to express when we get there,  maybe in the next episode about Throat Chakra.  Let's try to see if Krishna's words evoke responses in us. He said - There are two types of faith previously told by me `Nyaan Yoga` for the mathematicians;  for the philosophers,  for the thinkers, for the artists. And Karma Yoga, who are connected to me. He  continues to add 

>Na [not] Karmnaam [of righteous action] Anarambhan [the ones that are never initiated] Naishkarmyam [a stage where one is beyond actions - such as Krishna] Purushah [a man] Ashnute [one who achived said stage];
>
>Na [nor] Cha [also] Sannyasnat [one who has renounced everything, towards them] eva [] Siddhim [distinguisable success] Sam-adhigacchti [easily goes towards].


Everyone wants the remote controller. You press the button and Netflix starts. I'm sure they are working on neural link based remote controllers. You don't even need to press the button. Things automatically happen `Naishkarmya`. The state when someone is beyond actions. Krishna says - You cannot achieve the status of beyond actions without first initiating the actions and even those who have renounced everything, even they don't attract any distinguishable success. 

We are talking Karma Yoga, the conversation between Krishna and Arjuna Krishna continues. 

>Na [nor] Hi [certainly] Kashchit [anyone] Kshnam [a moment] Api [too] Jatu [at any time] Tishthati [stays - sit down] Akaram Krit [doing nothing];
>
>Karyate [forced into] Hi [certainly] Avashah [helplessly] Karma [actions] Sarvah [All] Prakriti-Jaih [born of their nature] Gunaih[qualities]

 no one can sit idle even for a moment, at any point in time. All of us are forced into actions based on the qualities born out of our nature. 


Now in `Hath Yoga`, we have a term called `Samskara` and it said that the all the things that we have imbibed based on our prior activities, prior knowledge of this birth,  of this life,  or of the previous life. The reminiscences, the the learnings are stored in our base chakra, what we call `Mool-aadhara` and the intelligence is focused on in the base Chakra.  Intelligence is represented by a folded snake called `Kunalini`. Now, it's a way to represent, it doesn't mean that a folded snake is sitting somewhere in the base chakra. So, Krishna says  we are forced into actions helplessly by the qualities born out of our nature. This is as scientific as it gets. There is no proof required for this. We cant sit idle for a moment and we do things that we like based out of our nature. Krishna continues to further qualify Karma Yoga, he says 

>Karmemdrayani [Work Organs - Hands, feet] Sanyamya [holding back] Yah [who] Aaste [indulges in] Mansa [mind] Smaran [thinking];
>
>Indriya Arthan [purpose of above work organs] Vumudha [oblivious] Atma [person] Mithya [fasle] Aacharah [conduct] Sa [he] Uchyate [showcases]. 


Holding back your work organs, If one is  mentally stuck into the situation ,  oblivious to the very purpose of our sensory organs,  that person describes himself by a false conduct 

We were talking about About the dreams in the beginning of this episode. And we said that listening to the word, understanding the context, appreciating the situation and try to feel our emotional response is the beginning of Naad Yoga. And we talked about the REM sleep. One of the objective of our dreaming process is to follow our actions. Whatever we did in the day, we perform the activities in a specific sequence. And we approached a situation based on our nature. Now the science is showing that during your dreams, we go through, we roll back all the activities that we did in the day, and then approach them with alternative possibilities. That's the reason when we wake up next morning. The situation seems very different, very simple. We seem to find the solutions in our dreams. Now Karma Yoga is in classical `Hatha Yoga` is the yoga of top chakra, what we call `Sasrara`. And there are 1000s of `Vrittis` that are attached to this specific area. This is where we form the secondary and tertiary connections. This is where the learning happens. And we decrypt the knowledge. While `Naad Yoga` stabalizes, our heart chakra and our throat chakra by listening and enacting the spoken word, Karma Yoga is the yoga of `Sasrarar` and beyond. So Krishna says that  by pulling back the activities. one who indulges in thinking about the situation, oblivious to very purpose of our senses, the senses that are given to us, the eyes, the ears, the nose, for smell, the touch, the purpose of these sensory organs, is to engage us into actions, so that we give an opportunity to our top chakra Sahasrara to decrypt the knowledge for more connections. Now, you will anyway be involved in actions, forced  by our nature . And that's how we keep on reinforcing what you are anyway doing. To really leverage the amazing machinery that we have. We need to go beyond our nature, we need to indulge into righteous actions, as you will see down the line, Krishna  will further qualify what are the actual `Karma` and what are the bondage to this world? By indulging in righteous actions by understanding the situation through our sensory orders, and then by indulging into actions with our work organs, we are in fact giving an opportunity to our deep mind to decrypt essential knowledge beyond our nature.
