<center><h1> Two Yogies</h1></center>
<center>
<figure>
    <audio
       controls
       src="./c3e1.mp3">
          Your browser does not support the
          <code>audio</code> element.
    </audio>
</figure>
</center>

## Episode 4

- Two adjectives of a `KarmYogi` -  `Muktasanga` and `Samachara`. A `Karmyogi` being someone who sides with actions rather than inaction when the situation demands such. 
- Muktasanga - Does it mean isolated ? If that is so, `Krishna` should be in a jungle - not in a war. And even in a jungle, we are in association with the nature - the trees, the animals, the predetors and the birds.
- Can you be `Samachra` without first being free from the associative nature ? 
- What is modren day war ? Business or sports. The only difference is earlier fight was always between the fittest among both sides and the first hurts were the fittest. Even today the fight of business is between the best - best of the businesses on both sides - rather all the sides for all the nations are playing the war of business enterprise. ; but first hurt are the poorest. Should Krishna advise you to give up this war ? Should he advise to win this war ? Or should he ask you to fight this war righteously ? Without being on one side or the other. With a balanced view point. A true viewpoint that is based on you listening to your own voice - voice of your emotions. Sound of your soul ?
- It once again comes back to "How do you get the ability to understand and say what you feel - Naad Yoga. 
- And here we have two yogies - Both can hear themselves and have the courage to say what they feel. Their conversation - centerstage in the biggest war of the ideas and the people. Two yogies - talking to establish the right from the wrong. Without being on a particular side. Looking at both sides with the same vision and wisdom. 
### 3.10

Saha [along with] Yajnah [ritual of actions] Prajah [community of followers] Srishtva [having created] Pura [previously anciently] Uvacha [I said] Praja-patih [to the care taker of community like a king who is supposed to serve the community on my behalf];

Anena [ by this] Prasvisydhvam [ having attained more prosperity] Esah [ throgh this] Vah [s/he] Astu [stayed as] Ishta [ desired things] Kama-dhuk  [ owner who enjoys his rein].

{ Along with Yajna ,  I first built a community of followers and appointed and explained the purpose of Yajna to a community leader; with which s/he attained all s/he desired and enjoyed what s/he got } 

(The biggest of all discoveies is the formation of organization for a righteous purpose. This is the key differentiator between animals and humans. Even animals and insects organize for self help but none does so for the righteous. Krishna said that he is the one who brought who invoked this idea along with Yajna itself. Most of the successful people as Krishna was are the ones who indulge in actions without association , desires and they do it dexterously in a balanced manner ; their selfless actions develop a community of followers . Having figured out the Yajna and the community, they pass on all this as a heritage to a deserving community leader who takes pleasure in maintaining and growing the ritual . Thus Krishna asks Arjuna to follow such Karm Yoga , just like him . Even becoming a community leader is a far less than the true potential we all carry )

### 3.11

Devan [ demogods]  Bhavyata [ having pleased] Anena [ with this (the yajna)] Te [ those] Devah [ demigods] Bhavyantu [ will please] Vah [ you];
Parasparam [ mutually] Bhavyantah [ pleased] Shreyah [ honour ] Param [ ultimate] Avapsyath [ you will achieve].
