
<center><h1>Naad Yoga</h1></center>
<center>
<figure>
    <audio
       controls
       src="./naadYoga.mp3">
          Your browser does not support the
          <code>audio</code> element.
    </audio>
</figure>
<h2> Episode 0</h2>
</center>


In Hindu Scriptures, we come across something called `Nad Yoga` - Yoga of recital and chanting. Nad Yoga is basically a set of techniques to focus on the sounds. Sounds that come from the universe to our ears are called `Aahata` which means hurt or decayed. The sounds that are inside us are called `Anahta` or the sounds that are pure and unhurt. As per `Hath Yoga` - both of these types are controlled by the `vrittis` of the heart Chakra - also called `Anahta`.  Stabilizing this Chakra basically means building an ability that may allow us to hear our internal sounds.  So Nadyoga starts with focusing on externally chanted mantras with deep focus on the words. A solid understanding of the meaning and how the word is spoken. And then trying to catch what we feel about the word and the sentence and the overall context. That is Nad Yoga. We practice Nad Yoga with external chanting  in the beginning; this could be a Mantra, a well written article, a sermon or a poetical recital. The core idea is to focus on every said word and contemplate our reactions to the recitation. Whatever they may be. Good or bad. We practice Nad Yoga gradually over years till we are able to see the calling of our emotions also called `Anahat Naada`. In essence, once we are able to hear all our internal emotions, analyse them , undertand them , then only we can control the words we speak. We will check out the spoken "words" in next episode along with role of throat Chakra on our well being. 

So this attempt is to focus on the words of `Karm Yoga` as told by Krishna to Arjuna in Bhagvad Gita. An intense discusson on the very core ieas of `Karm Yoga`. In a way, I am trying to use `Nad Yoga` to learn or evoke my internal responses to `Karm Yoga`. 

