# What is `Karm Yoga` ?


Performing righteous actions rigorously - like a ritual , is `Karm Yoga`.  The caveat, however, is - our focus on actions needs to be singular - such intense that we forget  the "Outcomes". 

## Separation of Actions from Outcomes

The key to understanding `Karm Yoga` is that actions and outcomes are two separate entities. Think of a roulette table. Action is to put your money on a number. Expected outcome is you hit a jackpot . They don't have a cause and  effect relationship. To be correct from physics standpoint - Yes , action has a reaction. Means - when you put money on the table, table will push it up :-) but that is not the outcome we are talking about. The outcome that we are discussing has a degree of separation from the actions , it is  one of the possibility out of millions or possibilities if a multitude of the things get coincidental and sequential. With each degree of separation, the probability of favorable outcome reduces exponentially - such that, in real world , expected outcomes are as improbable as hitting a jackpot in a casino. 

Our senses chase certain outcomes. Outcomes that our mind deems better for the survival (or growth) of physical body. Based on the outcomes, we keep adjusting our actions hoping to hit  the jackpot. Continuing with our example - adjusting the action means we change the slot or the number that we put our money on - still hoping for the jackpot.  Our sensory focus always stays tied to the outcomes. And thus we miss all the action. 

>Test - in any gambling session, All you remember the major wins - Your lucky number but you never remember all the numbers you put your money on and lost.  You don't remember the sequence that led to the win.  Try to remember above next time you sit for a poker game - entire history.  Your focus will shift from winning the game to "how" the game works ?

Let us take another example from stock market. We invest in say Apple hoping the stock will go up after the new product launch. Our investment has no relationship at all as to what Apple is planning or how the overall market reacts to to the news. Our hope  (in this case) is as good as hoping for the jackpot . You may say that yes, you can predict what new products are likely. Yes you can, to some extent but reaction of stock market is like the spinning wheel.  If the stock goes up, we feel happy and claim a win. If it goes down, we take another action to sell the stock to stop losses. In a way, we have put the cart in front of the horse. Random outcomes govern our most of our actions. We live in expectation of one outcome to another. We forget the action - means we still "act" ; but our focus is on "outcomes" - not "Actions"

> `Karm Yoga` is shifting our focus from "outcomes" to the "Action". 

## Why "Actions" matter ?

As per the hypothesis - the actions are driven by the [protected] knowledge. Just the way we can infer the existence of a Black hole by interpreting it's effects, observing our own actions can give us an indication on the nature of our own black-box, our [protected] knowledge. 

This knowledge is hidden to our senses because senses are externally focussed on outcomes. Senses are information receptors of the conscious agent. Which is not bad because the primary purpose of senses is survival - not the "exit". The more we focus on worldly outcomes, more we are bonded to our sensory "reality". Which also means that with outcome based strategies, it is impossible to access internal hidden knowledge. 

In essence we must seek "Action" NOT the "Outcomes". Outcomes will be there but they are to be seen as by-products. The primary goal is to know yourself. So next time you go for a job interview, your focus should be what work you are going to do. Not the monthly compensation or perks :-) . In fact , voluntary service is the best way to get initiated in `Karm Yoga`.. As you get steadfast on this path , you will realize , even the nature of work is unimportant , what matters is you are constantly observing your "Actions" and are always eager to perform them. The best example is kids eagerly waiting for the play time. They don't care of the out comes. They don't even care what game. All they want do is to indulge in action - video games included :-) 

## Why righteous actions ?

Any action is good if the goal is to only know / understand [protected] knowledge. Doing "righteous" actions is a smarter way because the people around you will facilitate (if needed). On the other hand, if your actions are random, "outcomes focussed" people will hinder your ritual. As a `karmyogi` , you don't care about the outcomes, but people around you do. So , do the right thing unless you are living a solitary life in a Himalayan cave :-) . In fact, It is easier to do the right thing ...except when you are in a testing situation like Arjuna, that demands to take a point at your friends and relatives ; and teachers .. But such events are rare and think of them as a final test of `KarmYoga` - not the initiation. 

**Thus Krishna said to Arjuna ..**

>> If you win (in realizing your [protected] knowledge) , you will exit from the miseries of the cyclic nature, even if you lose , you will still have the wealth of this world to rejoice. And if you died, this body is anyways fungible. 

## Do I really control the Karma? 

Depends on who am I ? If I am physical body and mind then "No". In this case random outcomes control our actions. 

If I am the [protected] knowledge , then yes. 

This also means that the free will is contingent upon our definition of who we are. 

## Why is it encrypted to senses. 

The purpose of senses is constantly seek the environment to ensure our survival. So that we get a window to explore the self. Unfortunately, senses get tied to the sensory pleasures and lead our actions to accomplish more and more pleasurable outcomes. We get into the gambling game. Keep putting money in various slots in hope of hitting the pot. Before we know it, we start using senses solely for pleasure. Even the survival becomes secondary. In a way, we get addicted to favorable outcomes. At this stage, it is almost impossible for the senses to focus on "Actions". Thus the [protected] knowledge appears encrypted. 

`Karm Yoga` is thus a gradual process to retrain the senses away from sensory pleasures to focus back on `Karma`. Important thing to know is the problem really are not the pleasures. The problem is we got defocused. 

## Isn't it impossible ?

Yes it is. Detaching the actions from outcomes is as "impossible" as picking up a violin and become a musician the very first day. We need to think `Karm Yoga` as a skill. The ultimate skill that enables you to learn anything you want and finally know yourself. Thus it is a journey. 

## You may already be a `Karm Yogi"

If learning new skills comes easy to you; you may already be a `Karm Yogi`. You just didn't know it. And the training could be misplaced. For example, the modern way to accomplish something is to set your eyes on a higher goal. May be you want to become a successful you tuber. Or you want to excel in sports. The coaching is to give you a bigger dopamine so that you could let go immediate sensory pleasures. You work hard to accomplish something. 

Krishna says - If you practice `Karm Yoga` for a worldly goal, you will easily get that. Means you focus on actions to say become a writer. You will become a writer. But all such gains vanish in due course. And you again start to accomplish something else - may be even bigger. You are already a `Karm Yogi` because you know how to control your senses and focus on actions. You are just striving for the lesser goals. In a way you are short selling yourself. Why not learn the "process of learning" itself. And access entire knowledge base that is already hidden in you. In fact, such short selling is the cause of all cycles. It creates a race among humans to do more of the less- to chase more and more lesser goals. It makes us seek higher and higher sensory pleasures. Bigger the rise, deeper the fall .. 

Same skill of learning, with a better coaching, can lead to eternal peace and fulfilling knowledge... All that when we get to the framework. 

# Elegance Test

Before we pursue the experimental test of the hypothesis - the idea must pass the elegance test. The model proposed by Gita is beautiful in the sense it uniquely empowers every individual to overcome the miseries of life and at the same time, it sets up the stage for a successful career as a residue. Our individual success leads to a world worth striving for. 

In essence - if Gita is True , it is a good news we all are waiting for.. 


