# Interplay of knowledge and Intelligence

Every single manifestation has a full copy of knowledge but it's shape is what it decrypted. In fact the shape represents the information pattern that intelligence built to hold the knowledge. 

From information standpoint, the final shape of manifestation is what matter. All intermediate stages are the love of labor. From knowledge standpoint the history of sequential iterative changes that matter. Each commit. 

Knowledge gets into a shape through `Karma` - Action 

Information is shaped up by `Budhi` - Intelligence. 

A `Yajna` leads to manifestation because `Karma` and `Budhi` play hand in hand. 

So we can say - birth of a manifested article is because of interplay of knowledge and Intelligence. 

Gita says - This entire universe is made up of the interplay between - Prakriti (Intelligence) and Purusha (Knowledge)

`Dhayana` is to stabilize the `Prakriti`. `Yajna` is to organize the knowledge. 

# Procreation - expansion 

When `Dhyana` gets excessive. Means we are consuming too much information (both Manan and Chintan); the information overload needs to split into two. When `Yajna` gets too intense there is no amount of information mesh that can hold it tight. Which means a fork happens in the git repository. Each child gets the same `knowledge` at the start but shapes up into two separate streams heading to two separate destinations - two separate manifestations. Each has to restart the `Yajna` to realize a specific knowledge that is hopefully less intense than the parent. 

The knowledge carries forward - means , you don't lose the `Karma`. But intelligence has to start from the scratch. What is going to be the new target manifestation. Survival till the child is strong enough for `Yajna`. `Vyartha Cheshta` and finally start of `Dhyana` and init of new Yajna. The knowledge repo is intact till you are ready to make first commit in the fork.

# Branches vs Forks

The intelligence was at play when a new branch was created to hold a new feature of knowledge but the branch will finally merge back with the main branch. A feature , a new rinkle got added. More knowledge is decrypted but we added a new square in the mesh. Mesh expanded a little bit. Both knowledge and Intelligence are intact. 

Fork is different. The intelligence is lost. Knowledge carries forward. Both the forks get the same history of commits - same knowledge but this knowledge lies dormant till a new `Yajna` starts. It is quite possible , new `Yajna` may never start. 
