<center>
<figure>
    <audio
       controls
       src="./1dot0.mp3">
          Your browser does not support the
          <code>audio</code> element.
    </audio>
</figure>
</center>


<center><h1> Chapter 1.0</h1></center> 

Just like any scientific theory, be it Newtonian mechanics of Maxwell's description of electromagnetism , Gita's biggest insights are built into its postulates . At a time, say five-ish thousand years ago, when humans didn't have the mathematical tool box or the appliances of science and compute; Krishna introduced the humanity one of the most unintuitive and obscure idea. At a time when humans had no recourse other than settling and submitting to a strange, unknown and external force - say God; Krishna theorized that the God actually lives in all of us in the shape of complete, untempered and unaltered knowledge what he named - `Atma`. Our own copy of the God. Embedded or seeded deep into us. 

This was obviously something beyond imagination of that time. And probably even now !  But now we have advantage of many scientific discoveries that defy our imagination. For example the postulates of quantum mechanics are beyond our day to day reality, yet we accept them for their experimental predictions are beyond debate. No one can agree to Schrodinger's wave equation at the face value unless we delve deep into the probabilistic nature of our universe and see how well the model predicts our spooky reality. For that matter even Einstein's relativistic approach is beyond us unless we see the experimental truth that gravity does warps the space or the space-time not sure which one is a correct choice of the term :-) . 

Coming back to Gita, the idea that Krishna discovered is experiential. As testable as the postulates of most of the science ; however Gita doesn't have a mathematical bias or rather limitation. After all we need mathematical proof only to convince experimental physicists to take up expensive experiments. Instead, Gita's postulates are individually testable - I don't need to prove mathematically to myself to test something that I can run through in my daily routine. In fact , Gita mandates that these postulates are only individually testable because every concious agent has a different vantage.  In essence the idea is testable ( with some dedication and rigor)  that anyone can do it in there own vast laboratory that we call life. 


## The Hypothesis

Gita  proposes a distributed model of immutable knowledge. Distributed computing is fairly common these days thanks to  "Block Chains" and crypto currencies. It says a full copy of  protected immutable knowledge `Atma` is pre-built into all of us. We being the conscious agents `Jeeva` . 

### Protected 

because, this "knowledge" can not be destroyed by "worldly" means. Metaphorically - Fire can't burn it. It can't be drowned in water. Krishna says ..

> Na [not] Enam [this] Chindanti [cut through, make a hole --> destroy] Shastrani [weaponry] ; Na [not] Dahati [burns] Pavkah [fire].
>
> Na [not] Cha [ and] Enam [ this] Kladyanti [moistens] Aapah [water] ; Na [not] Shoshyati [dries] Marutah [ fast air] .
>
>  Weapons can't cut through or make a hole in it. Fire can't burn it. Water can't moisten it and air can't dry it. Which basically means it is not in the realm of manifested. 

### Immutable 

because this knowledge doesn't change. He says this knowledge is `Akshara` . In Hindi or Sanskrit `Kshra` means something that changes and `Akshara` is the opposite that means something that can never be changed. For example In Hindi `Akshara` also means written or spoken words to symbolize a word once spoken can never be changed. And once it is written down, it is kinda set in the stone. 

Krishna further says that the physical body is fungible but if we let lose this beautiful apparatus without decrypting the knowledge,  that is a wasted opportunity.

The "know how" to harness the energy is implicit in this knowledge. Thus a worldly metaphor would be a combination of DNA and Electricity - DNA as a representation of information and electricity to symbolize energy . In a way, this knowledge is the quantum field where the conscious particles take birth,  but Gita says that this can't be perceived by our normal senses. In a way it is encrypted `Avykta` to our externally focused mind and body. BTW, this is not a call for the blind faith. Just as in any scientific inquiry, we start with a hypothesis and then test the validity through experiments , we will see down the line in this book as to why this knowledge is encrypted and how to perceive it without using the survival oriented senses. Or learn to focus our senses on `Atma`. 

Since all of us get a full copy of this knowledge and the energy to act, we are free to choose our actions. Our Actions `Karma` determine what we finally shape into from our physical body standpoint and what we manifest in the world. We have full control on our `Karma`. 

### Worth knowing and Knowable but encrypted.

Gita says, this [protected and immutable] knowledge is all we need to know . 

Worth knowing because the answers to all the questions that we are seeking outside, are already embedded with in us. In a way the biggest question is who we are ?  That is what we are searching when we climb the `Himalayas` or sink to the depths of ocean or venture into deep and dark space. Our quest is to find who we are of is there something else, someone like us ?

Knowable because it is  built into us, it is called `Atma` which literally means "Me". In essence, this knowledge is what we are. Even if we identify ourselves with the body ; our Physical body (and mind) are only  tools to enable the "Actions". Like all other tools, they too decay with time. We sure need to take care of the tools but that care is meaningful only if we know who we are. 

> The good news is it is "Knowable". The bad one is it appears encrypted to our externally focussed senses. BTW it is important to state the meaning of "encrypted". Encrypted doesn't mean "impossible". It only means that it is hard to decrypt unless we devise a better algorithm. Better ways and means to understand the problem. This algorithm, the experiment and the set up is what we call `Karm Yoga`

Just as a Black hole, though beyond our sensory observatories, because information can't travel back from them , we can affirm their existence and other properties such as mass, rotation and entropy , through what they do.  Their effects. The best way to approach this inner knowledge is to observe the "Actions" it drives. The process of getting attached to (or focusing back on) the "Actions" is called `Karm Yoga`.

### Manifestation

The decrypted knowledge manifests into all that we perceive with our senses. Our individual decryption leads to us acquiring skills that can manifest things. The collective decrypted knowledge is what Gita refers to as `Bramha`. It says the purpose of concious agents is to get connected and be one with `Bramha`. In that, it recommends that we decrypt the knowledge in whatever role or locale we are. Which means we must act to manifest things based on our prescribed duties. That is what it says is our purpose `Karma` and we must do it as a ritual `Yazna`. It says that indulging and `Karma` through `Yazna` is the key that connects us  to `Bramha` -the entirety and thus makes the entire decrypted knowledge base accessible to us. And it suggests `Karm Yoga` as the sole means to accomplish this. 

In chapter 3 , verse 15 ; Krishna says that `Karma` - righteous actions are created from `Bramha` and `Bramha` is created from `Akshra` - the unchangeable i.e.  knowledge. He says .. 

>Karm Bramha Udbhavam Viddhi, Bramha Akshara Samudbhavam ;
>
>Tasmat Sarv Gatam Bramha, Nityam Yazne Pratisthitam 

As we said above , Bramha means the entirety. Everything that is out there. In Hindi (or Sanskrit) , we call this universe as `Bramhand` - which means a slice , an instance of the `Bramha`. In a way, we can imagine `Bramha` as the entire overarching system - the multiverse. Not the "human only" system. This is the system that through evolution or by design is  what creates the righteous actions. Means system designed duties.Every being in the universe has a purpose. There is nothing here that has no good reason to be here. In addition,  the system also has a superior garbage collection system. Anything that is not serving a purpose is quickly 'garbage collected' by the nature. Even the garbage collection process has a deeper purpose. It turns the such collection  into the food for the ones who are striving or serving  a purpose. In may sound harsh, but such is the reality of this manifestation.. 

Krishna says that the specified actions, for every being ; from a bacteria to an elephant; are created by the `Bramha`. And `Bramha` is created by the `Akshara` - Something that never changes. And that is knowledge. Thus in essence, the actions are created by the knowledge. Krishna further says , that therefore, for all pervading `Bramha` , always situate yourself into your `Yazna`, the prescribed and pre-decided ritual of actions. 

To sum up the hypothesis into scientifically testable postulates .. Goes without saying that we will dive deep on these ideas in the following sections of "getting started" where we build a solid grip on concepts and the vocabulary of Gita. To summarize , here is a numbered list that I will quickly run through .. 

1. All conscious agents get a protected immutable copy of entire knowledge base - Something like git clone. 
2. The knowledge appears encrypted to our externally focused senses and mind but it is knowable with proper rigor and algorithms - `Karm Yoga`.
3. We manifest ourselves and the things around us based on the knowledge we decrypt through `Karm Yoga`. The recommended approach is a ritualistic approach to righteous actions - prescribed duties.
4. The collective decrypted knowledge is called `Bramha`. Following `Karm Yoga` that is doing righteous actions based on our role thus puts us in unison with Bramha and that is what our purpose is. 
5. Becoming one with `Bramha` - the entirety is thus the first step to understand the entire knowledge base because now we at least have access to all that has already been decrypted. 
6. When we decrypt the entire knowledge base we are free from the cyclic nature of our reality because now we are one with the immutable knowledge. 
7. Our externally focused senses and mind are there to provision this opportunity for us. Opportunity to decrypt the knowledge. They do so by ensuring our survival through longevity or passage of genes.  In essence we have ability to mutate faster to access the immutable. Thus human life is a blessing among all other species. Obviously because we are bestowed with bigger brains that enabled us create the tools and skills. At the same time it also means more opportunities for distractions. Thus we need to regulate our senses with mind and indulge them in `Karm Yoga`. 
8. The cycle of knowledge to manifestation and vice versa is end less. It is a circle or spherical. Not a linear timeline. 

## Theory of Everything 

For the better part of last hundred years, physicists are trying hard to unify the theory of relativity with that of quantum mechanics ; also called the unification of theory of large spatial bodies led by gravity with the theory that regulates physical systems at the micro sub atomic scale. But literally speaking , theory of everything, can't just be a scientific theory pertaining  to motion of physical systems. It must take in to account the other aspects of human life such as conciousness, memory , intelligence. And it must address two basic questions 

- First ,  What is it that drives us to survive - either through enhancing longevity or through passage of our genes.
- And second - what is the reason for our quest. Why are we always seeking the truth. The true nature of our reality or ourselves. 

Gita Framework resolves many of such burning questions, or at least attempts to set priorities for our strife. The later is more important because even science appears to be all over the place ; least said about the degradation of religions. In a way Gita, gives necessary structure and skeleton to our quest - scientific and spiritual. And it gets more relevant in these asking times, when on one side imminent  opportunities (think artificial intelligence, robotics , space and biotech) are hitting exponential trajectory, and on the other more than half the humanity struggles for elemental air and water. There was never a bigger demand on humans to choose right from wrong and then stay focused on path. 

<>
Let us start the journey .. 

