<center>
<h1>`Chakra`</h1>
<iframe src="https://archive.org/embed/arjunUvaach/1dot1.mp3" width="350" height="40" frameborder="0" webkitallowfullscreen="true" mozallowfullscreen="true" allowfullscreen></iframe>
</center>

> Jatsya hi druvo mrityur, dhruvam janm mritasya cha;

Krishna said in verse 27 of chapter 2 of Gita that all things born in truth must die and out of the death in truth comes life. This kinda hints at the cyclic reality of our being. In previous article, where we hypothesised the postulates of Gita , we went through a numbered list that we are all endowed with a protected, immutable but encrypted copy of knowledge. We also saw that `Bramh` - the system, provisions everything ; implements everything that we need to run our lives- in our tiny box. In addition it also implements a superior garbage collection system. But we left an important point open that the  underlying reality is a continuum. There is no beginning or an end. It's a everlasting cycle of knowledge to manifestation and vice-versa. 

To understand the "Continuum", let us look at our physical reality. There are two things that don't need any more scientific proof


- First that our notion of Time is linear and unidirectional.

- And second that every thing we observe is a "wave". The light is electromagnetic wave. Sound is a normal longitudinal wave. Even the tiny particles, such as electrons act as a wave as shown in the popular double slit experiment. I think there is a general agreement in the scientific community that every thing that we observe in this universe is a wave. Two of our most potent sensory capabilities - hearing and vision - respond only to waves.


## Waves to strings

A wave has two primary aspects - time , normally plotted on the x axis and an amplitude plotted perpendicular to the linear time. If we take the time aspect out of the wave, a wave is nothing but a circle. The idea of removing the linear time from x axis is not uncommon. Such plots are called "circular graphs", sometimes also referred to as unit circle. If we remove the time aspect from our minds, a wave is nothing but the spinning circle. The spin of the circle defines the frequency of the wave and the size of the circle defines it's amplitude. In Trigonometry, the spin functions can be described by Sine and Cosine of the angle at the center of circle with respect to to the x axis or the perpendicular to the x axis. If we prove that "time" is a creation of our sensory perception, than it is obvious that underlying reality is circular. 

<insert graphic on Mac>

Now assume we are at the center of the circle and we want to observe the circumference in a clock or anticlockwise fashion. What we observe is a wave. This is because our senses focus only at one point at an instance. Thus our focus moves along the circumference. This focal line is also referred to as "Phaser" in the study of signal processing. < This is the point where the energy (or disturbance) is situated >

In a way, a wave is a manifestation of circular "spin". It is not hard to imagine that if we have a spinning spiral, the wave amplitude will grow bigger as the spiral gets bigger and likewise it will get smaller as the spiral contracts. The question is what is this circle that we perceive with our sensory apparatus. Before we do that, we need a bit of a refresher on our "sensory apparatus". 

## Sensory apparatus

We have five senses - vision , hearing , smell , touch and taste. The first three are the information receptors through the disturbance passed by the waves. The last two are the verification mechanism. Let us say we see a tree with our eyes. This can very well be a trick - may be a visual projection but if we touch it to conform the shape with our hands, we can be sure it is a tree. Likewise we use taste to  confirm the edibility of food and so on. 

In humans,  vision of the primary sense for information reception while hearing and smell are secondary & tertiary respectively. In dogs , hearing is the primary information receptor followed by smell and vision. Thus dogs perceive the world in a very different way versus us humans. 

Our vision is to decode the transverse electromagnetic waves , hearing is for longitudinal compression waves that pass through air , smell is for chemicals diffused in the air. Touch is confirmation of solids and taste is confirmation of liquids. Vision being our primary sense has a unique situation in the sense we see the narrow spectrum right at the center of electromagnetic spectrum. This allows us to see the waves as well as the solids. If our vision was tilted towards radio waves , we would probably  never see a solid while on the upper side of spectrum where we have the gamma rays , the waves are mostly particles. If we were designed to see only Gamma rays, our world had probably had no waves . Thus we are in the center of duality of wave-particle nature. This is a very intelligent choice in terms of signal processing and being able to experience a real world. 

All the tools and machines of science, that we have discovered to date, are there to enhance our sensory perception. We can expand our vision to infrared or to gamma rays by using the instruments. We can expand our hearing to thousands of miles with radio waves. We can enlarge tiny things millions of time to enable our eyes see the atomic scale or through telescopes we can see deep into space. In essence, science is nothing but extension of our sensory perception. 

Since we are born into this sensory experience, we can't perceive anything more basic than our sensory reality. This means that waves must travel to us to enable us see or hear anything in real world or we can say our real world is dependent on our sensors such as eyes or ears or smell or taste.. But our perception is more than just the sensors. For example we can create a sensory world in our dreams. We can see and hear things with in our dreams. There are few studies that point that some of us even experience even "smells" in the dreams. We can even use touch and taste in the dreams. This means that the perception is not dependent on waves traveling to our sensors. Could it be that our perception of waves is our own creation?  Is it possible that the circle that we perceive or the waves that emanate from the phasor motion with in a circle are our creation? Unfortunately we have very limited (if at all any) on this internal perception. We can't even answer some of the very basic questions when it comes to what happens with in us.

The question really is who is the observer and what exactly we are looking for ? The fact that we can create a pretty consistent sensory experience in our dreams , means that what we are handling is a body of knowledge that we are trying to decrypt. The process of discovery appears to be of wave nature. If we understand this process, we might also understand the nature of our unidirectional time. And the fact that we do have senses, means that there are two aspects to this quest - internal - something similar to our dreams; and external - what we refer to as real world. Our better understanding of this quest might also clarify the duality in our quest - the concious and sub conscious. To understand both these, we need to dive deeper into nature of our observations. 

Ya Nisha Sarv Bhootanam , ... 


## Nature of our observations.

The obvious fact is observations are always of a finite duration. There is always a start and an end.  Just like any scientific observation, our own physical journey has a well defined start and a unique end. We were all born on a specific date. And we will sure die some day. There is no denial to this truth because this phenomenon is under our constant vigil - 24 by 7. Our life is our longest and most meticulous observation. And the good news is we don't need any apparatus of science to observe our life. We all have all the sensors, billions of them , pre built into us to test this sensory reality - the reality of own lives.

### The Boundary Conditions

The other obvious thing about the "start" and the "end" is we can't fully fathom the boundary conditions. From boundary conditions, I mean the split second before the start and same after the end. We are always uncertain as to what led to the conditions where we are starting to observe and what happens after the observation. For example none of us have seen our own birth, nor do we know anyone who could describe the experience of their death. 

You may say our own birth and death is kinda unique situation because we didn't have fully developed senses at the time of our birth and in similar fashion, our senses bail out on us when we are experiencing death. Absolutely true. And that is exactly what I am trying to say. The underlying reality precedes the inception of our sensory capability and it continues long after. Even if we do crowd sourcing , our collective experience here in this universe is a tiny fraction. 

### The infinite expanse

If we were certain about the immediate past or the future of our observation, then they too are part of our finite observation, and then again we don't know what happened before or after. There is always something before we have complete knowledge of the process and there is always something after we close. We can continue to expand that split second to  say for 13.8 billion years and reach the start of this universe but there is still scope to prepone our start. For argument sake, let us take an extreme example - the birth of our universe. We do have a concrete scientific evidence in cosmic microwave background radiations that take us pretty close to the big bang,  say around four hundred thousands years. Gravitational waves from those early days might take us down to a picosecond - a trillionth of a second , but there is still a picosecond. That tiny split second is what science believes where this universe became one from zero,  but it is beyond our observations.

In essence , It doesn't really matter if we are talking of our own birth or the birth of this universe , or for that matter any other sensory observation ; there is always something more to know - something that created the conditions of our observation . An infinite expanse of knowledge cradles all our observations. This is kinda important to wrap our arms around the arrow of the time as we perceive. 

## Arrow of Time

If we leave the murkiness before the start aside and the same that exists after the end , we can attach specificity to these two points. May be with some assumptions. Our senses are designed to take the shortest distance between these two points - the fastest way to consume. In a scientific observation we know this as the "accuracy" of the machine.  We want our instruments to take precise measurements as quickly as possible, quicker the better. In normal life we name this sensory attribute as "survival". Survival of the fittest means the most accurate and fastest way to consume what is available to our senses - food , information and entertainment - everything that we can perceive with our senses. 

In other words , this specific start and end is what gives us the illusion of linearity of time - the arrow of time. We can say, linearity of our time is an outcome of our sensory observations because senses always want to take the shortest distance, the straight line. 

The question is how our senses take the shortest path ? Or the least time to consume. Or we can say, what is the fastest way to process the information assuming we are searching something. In essence we are asking what is our sensory algorithm?

Let us say we are looking for a needle in a 'proverbial' haystack. The logical way is to split the stack into two equal parts and search the first half. If we found the needle, we don't need to search the rest. If we didn't then look for the needle in the second half. That was easy but the key thing is "looking outside our observation space". This is a very important aspect . If we deploy the splitting technique, we must be open to checking outside our search space. We may confirm this behavior in our normal experience. The definitive thing about our sensory perception is we always want to know about that split second - the boundary conditions.  What happened just before the start ? And what is going to happen after the end.

If we repeat this operation over and over, the stack gets smaller and smaller. Kinda like a straight line. In computing world we call this algorithm "mapReduce". Logical splitting allows us to assign compute workload to different nodes in a cluster. Internet search is based on indexing and "mapReduce". 

If we don't find what we are looking for, we keep on extending our search space. It is because of this reason we have already expanded our tiny box from our own lifespan to the lifespan of the universe - 13.8 billion years though we still not sure as to what we are searching for. Our tiny box is now a big universal box :-) , though we now have more questions than what we started with :-) The quest is endless and so is the supply of 'proverbial' hay. And also there is no point in looking at the stacks that we already searched. That would be an awful waste of limited resources our senses have. So it is efficient to make the algorithm unidirectional.  But our senses have one more trick up their sleeves. As soon as we find what we were looking for (or even before that) , we deploy our senses into next quest oblivious o what is our ultimate quest. We don't want our machines to idle even for a moment.

Krishna says .. 

>Na [nor] Hi [certainly] Kashchit [anyone] Kshnam [a moment] Api [too] Jatu [at any time] Tishthati [stays - sit down] Akaram Krit [doing nothing];
>
>Karyate [forced into] Hi [certainly] Avashah [helplessly] Karma [actions] Sarvah [All] Prakriti-Jaih [born of their nature] Gunaih[qualities]
>
> No one can sit idle even for a moment, at any point in time. All of us are forced into actions based on the qualities born out of our nature. 

### Desires

So we saw that our observations have a unique start and end;  and our senses are designed to take the shortest path. We also saw that there is always a quest to seek before the start and beyond the end that is a direct fallout of our sensory algorithm. The very algorithm that makes us an accurate sensory machines also mandates that we must be open to seek  outside our search space. And we also noticed that if we find what we are looking for, almost instantaneously,  we are onto next quest - the most effective use of our sensory machine - no idling!. 

This ever seeking, engaged and ever expanding nature of our sensory reality is what we know as "Desires". In essence "Desires" are the basis of our unidirectional arrow of time.

Now that we have a good handle our unidirectional arrow of time - our sensory reality,  the question is what is the underlying reality - our second conjecture ? To make it easy to comprehend that everything below our perceived arrow of time is circular in nature and is always spinning , we shall take help from science again ..

## Physical and metaphysical

If we see closely as to what we perceive, there are two types of systems in our sensory reality. The physical systems that we can perceive with our senses - we can touch or feel them; for example the Earth as part of the solar system, or even the tiny atomic particles that we observe through our extended senses - say a microscope. 

On the other side we have metaphysical systems. These systems are based in some physical system (or a mix of them) but we extend them further. For example a class room is based on physical four walls of a room in our primary school, but a class is lot more than just a room. It is a place for learning , networking and so many more things. We spend most of our lives in these mental constructs. These systems govern most of our sensory observations. Even if we observe, pure physicality, our interpretations are invariably in the context of a metaphysical system. Even the scientific observations are with in some community, some society or some project. Unlike the physical systems, the metaphysical systems are highly elastic. We can easily shrink or expand them based on our desires . Thus desires exist in these metaphysical systems. 

Most of our scientific experiments are focused on our physical systems but they are not a very useful aid to resolve the issues of our metaphysical systems. Thus we end up expressing through arts or social sciences. The good news is , both physical and metaphysical systems have one thing in common. They both are continuously spinning. 

## The spin.

We know for sure that in our physical world , everything spins around its own axis and around the axis of the larger system that it is part of. For example Earth not only spins on its own axis, it also spins around the axis of solar system that incidentally passes through the center of the Sun.  Now in physical systems, we might see some particles or say some meteorites, that don't seem to obey this rule . They seem to be on their path but we know sooner or later they will merge into a planet or a star. Even the photons (light) shall bend around if the gravity is strong enough - say in a Black Hole.  

Even in the metaphysical systems - say a classroom. A teacher is the central force . In a family mom holds the strings together. In a nation there are governments as the central force and in business there is always a nasty boss looking over our shoulders :-) In a way , the metaphysical systems are not that different from the physical systems - when it comes to the shape - the circular shape . We may not be able to perceive their shape in a physical sense , but the very idea that there is a central agency, means they are spherical in nature. If we try to represent a top down metaphysical model geometrically , we will end up into a circle on a 2 dimensional paper. In essence a circle or a sphere is the most probable configuration of our systems. 

So we get it that our metaphysical systems are circular, but how do we know they too are spinning ? For that we need to expand our observation window to a slightly bigger horizon. For example - if we see the political history of any nation, the same set of ideologies rule the nations in a circular fashion. Liberals and conservatives take their turns at the helm one after the another. If you heard your parents, the advise is to never throw away your old clothes, because the fashion repeats itself in about seven to ten years. Now you may not be able to fit into the jeans from your school but still you may always keep them  around to remind you of your bulging waist line :-) Mark Twain once said that history doesn't repeat itself but it always rhymes. 

The other way to look at the circularity of the underlying manifestation is to see it from a distance. In our physical systems, the Earth appears flat because we are very close to it but Sun and Moon appears circular because they are at a distance. The notion of "distance" in our physical systems morphs into what we know as a "dispassionate view" in our metaphysical systems. "Dispassion" is nothing but lack of histories. In other words, if we are tracking a metaphysical system, it has a timeline; if we are not , means we lack history, then every system is circular - be it fashions or politics.

It also means that if history is repetitive (or rhyming) , we don't need to go back in the past. Neither do we need to traverse to the future because future is anyway coming to us. A more efficient use of sensory apparatus that is busy in search, is to wait for the next iteration of similar events. Thus it makes sense that our sensory reality is unidirectional and we are banned from travelling back and forth in time. Thus a unidirectional arrow of time with a cap on time travel is the most optimum set up for the search and that is what our sensory reality is provided the underlying field is rotating in a circle -spinning or vibrating like a string. The best way to visualize it is a vinyl record. The pin stays at its place while the record below it spins. With every spin the pin gets to the next trench on the vinyl. History repeats but always with fresh music !

If this is so, the question is what is the purpose of our  linear stable reality ? There must be a good reason for us to chase survival ? The simple answer is nature is allowing us to build the skills.  In a way , our sensory reality is our training and testing ground. It is the launch  pad that enables us prepare for the next rhyme of the history. 

## Why Skills 

The notion that history repeats itself though always with a new(er) set of circumstances, means we can leverage the skills we develop but each time with a new set of challenges. Thus building skills is a useful exercise. Gita says building the skills is collection of something called `Daivy Sampad` - divine wealth. The system - `Bramh` can assign us certain tasks only if we have some skills. That is very easy to understand. In our workplace , we get to do specific jobs based on what our skills have.  If you are a good coder , you will get to code. If I am a good writer , I will get to write the  documentation :-) . Again, this is not to say one skill is better than other. All the skills are equally important. In the bigger universe, insects breed to clean up the mess, then other species evolve to clean up the insects. Thus evolution is about application of skills based on new set of realities. 

## Evolution 

The idea of evolution is very succinctly captured by Darwin in the phrase - "Survival of the fittest" . What does it mean to be fit ? Fitness is not about killing others. It is in being most skillful at the task that we are designed to do. In a way, evolution is baked into the intelligent design. Intelligent design in the sense that all species have a specified set of tasks and evolution in the sense that every new iteration of the cycle offers them new challenges. The current challenge for human race is to keep the planet habitable or make us a spacefaring species. In essence evolution means the most efficient application of our skills. The question is how do we develop such skills. 

Gita suggests `Yazna` - ritual of actions ; as the means to perfecting our skills . 

## Yazna

Let us say you want to research on cellular biology. You want to understand it inside out. I guess you will grow the cells in a lab. May be from stem cells or some other tissue depending on what aspect you wanna study. It is almost impossible to understand cellular mechanisms without having a real cell in your lab. And obviously, you need a lab. A lab is a place where you can remove all the external interactions. You can create a focused environment to study the scope you have in your experiment.

Think of `Yazna` as one of such focused environments that we create to figure out the nature of underlying reality. `Yazna` has many aspects but the core of it is building a skill - doing all the things that you otherwise do to build a skill in real life but doing so without attachment to worldly expectation. Why ? Because we want to remove all the "desires" from this particular iteration. We want to see what happens if we take an elongated observation without the influence of desires. We will talk in great length about the skill building aspect of `Yazna` in the section on  "Practice and Skills"  ; suffice to say here that Krishna says .. 

> Yajna-arthaat [Done for the sake of Yajna] Karmanah [actions] Anyatra [otherwise] Lokah [world] Ayam [this] Karm-Bandhnah [bondage by work];
>
> Tat [For it] Artham [for the sake] Karm [righteous actions] Kaunteya [O son of Kunti] Mukt-sangh [liberated from the curse of association] Samachara [do dexterously and balanced].

> Things that we do for the sake of `Yazna` - the ritual of actions, are `Karma`. Rest everything is a bondage to the sensory reality. Thus do your  actions, liberated from  external influences `Muktsangah `and `Samachara`- looking at the things without any bias. Being `Muktsangah` and `Samachara` are the prerequisites to create a pristine lab - A lab where we want to act without desires. 

In a way , the very definition of `Karma` is the actions that we undertake to accomplish a `Yazna`. I may also add that `Yazna` is just part of `Karm Yoga`. `Karm Yoga` includes righteous applications of the skill we thus build through `Yazna`. In a way, our linear reality is a lab where we can conduct `Yazna` and in addition it also provisions an opportunity to test those skills. 

Coming back to our example of cellular biology. If someone questions as to why are we conducting the experiment in the first place. May be we want to bring out a vaccine . May be we want to solve the mystery of cancer. May be we just want to understand how the cells actually work. The first two are called `Sakaam Yazna`. The last one , where we only crave for the truth is called `Nishkaam Yazna` - A `Yazna` without underlying desires. You may say there is still a desire. A desire to know the truth . And you are right in your assessment. Even `Nishkaam Yazna` has an underlying desire . A desire for truth; but given that we already have a physical body ; we can't reach a state of "Absolute No desire" unless we know the truth. Thus this last desire is a valid one - the desire to know our inner self. Our own copy of knowledge. The nature of our underlying reality - the continuum. 

## Recap

In this article we covered lot of ground !  To recap, we discussed two conjectures ..

First - that our sensory reality is an outcome of our sensory observations . In itself , this reality is akin to an interface - a virtualbox . We also saw that desires make this sensory reality appear linear- a unidirectional arrow of time.

Second - that the underlying nature of both our physical and metaphysical systems is circular and there is a continuous spin. 

If both these conjectures make sense, that means the notion of linear timeline is only in our virtualbox . And since underlying systems are circular (or spherical) , that means , there is no beginning or end. As such our universe and everything in our universe is perpetual. 

Krishna puts this idea very eloquently in second chapter. He tells Arjuna ..

> Na [never]  Tu [but]  Eva [certainly] Ahem [I]  Jatu [at any time]  Na [not]  Asam [exist] Na [nor]  Tvam [you]  Na [nor]  Ime [these]  Jan-Adipah [kings] ;
>
> Na [never] Cha [also]  Eva [certainly- all these] Na [not] Bhavishyamah [shall exist] , Sarve-Vayam [all of us]  Atah-Param [here after] .
>
> Never was there a time when I didn't exist, or you didn't exist, or all these kings who are standing in front of you to fight you didn't exist; nor in the future any one of us shall cease to be. 

 As long as we have perception of physical body we can't live without Earth , Air and Water. As such this physical vicinity must make our time appear linear. However, we can be dispassionate about our metaphysical systems. That is a good news because most of our desires exist in metaphysical systems. Thus Krishna suggests conducting `Yazna` - a dispassionate ritual of actions to build skills based on our opportunities. Being free from association (dispassion) and free from biases is a prerequisite for `Yazna`. Such a ritual of actions enables us to see underlying cyclic/ circular nature of our metaphysical systems. 

Once we are in unison with the cyclic nature. We are beyond the feelings the cycles of happiness and pain and we attain eternal peace. At this stage , we are beyond even the "actions". We appreciate the beauty of this creation and enjoy a lasting peace. He says ..


> Yah [ one ] Tu [ but ] Atma-ratih [ busy in self ] Eva [ certainly ] Syat [ stays, remains ] Atma-triptah [ satiated  ] Cha [ and ] Manvah [ human ];
>
> Aatmni [ In herself ] Eva [ only ] Santushtah [ satisfied ] Tasya [ for her ] Karyam [ work,, duty ] Na [ does not ] Vidyte [ exists ] .
>
> But one who is busy in herself and stays satiated ; satisfied in herself for her there is no work.

-----
## Knowledge and Information

You may further question that even a circle has some element of time on the x axis - equal to its diameter . And you are absolutely right . If we remove even the diameter; what we are left with is a simple harmonic oscillation perpendicular to the x axis. Just like a pendulum or a vibrating one dimensional string. The question is what turns a string into a three dimensional circle or spiral ? If we call it a circle of "knowledge" than the wave represents the manifestation of knowledge. The answer is "Actions" - Karma. Repeated set of actions build the manifestable  knowledge base. The manifestation of knowledge base is what we know as "Information" that is perceptible to our sensory apparatus. We can test this in our day to day life. A violin player , a sports person - through repeated cycles of practice - ritual of actions - create the knowledge base. This knowledge is what what manifests into a performance that we all eagerly consume as information. In a way ritual of actions - `Yazna` is the method to build the circle of knowledge. 

## Quest

Let us say you are reading a book. May be this book. The book is nothing but information. May be in digital form if you are reading on an electronic device. The question is why does it take couple of hours to read a book ? And if the book is dense like this one, it might take couple hours to read even a chapter :-). In essence, a chapter of this book, turned into say one hour of information. The next question is why are you reading this book ? At this specific time ? May be you were searching something on Google and Google brought you here. You thought this particular link might get you to what you were searching for. Same is true in our regular life. You go to a library - there are thousands of books. You just don't start reading anything. A specific book peaks your interest . Why ? - because you are looking for something. You are looking for a tiny piece of knowledge to augment the circle of your knowledge. In a way you are trying to solve a puzzle - how to invest in stocks to get the best gain for your money! How to exercise to reduce most weight ! Or whatever you are pursuing. 

## The format of our sensory experience

We know mp3 format. It is a format that can have our computer speakers vibrate so as to produce a sound wave. mp4 format can do the same with electromagnetic waves emanating from our computer screen. The question is what is the format for the three dimensional reality we have around us. It could be a dream format that we experience directly or a real format that we perceive when we think we are awake. Is there a difference ? We don't know yet but one thing is sure that our understanding of audio is lot more superior with discovery and application of radio waves. We are much better equipped now to decode our own vision as we understood the electromagnetic phenomenon and are able to recreate a visual experience on our screens. With brain machine interface, we shall by pass our sensors. In a way , indulging in our reality is the only way to better understand who we are. Are we a evolution of our senses , are we the brain that processes these sensory inputs of are we yet something more deeper ! The only way to find that is to indulge in this sensory reality. 


Now, many people believe our sensory reality is an illusion. They find indulging in actions in this reality quite meaningless. Gita says 


> Evam [thus] Pravartitam [ transformed ] Chakram [ cycle] Na [ no] Anuvartayti [ follows] Iha [ in this life] Yah [ one who];
>
> Agha-Aayuh [ lazy, sinful life] Indriya-aaramo [ seeker of sensory gratifications] Mogham [ uselessly] Parth [ Arjuna] Sah [ that person] Jeevati [ lives].
>
> One who doesn't adapts and practices this transformed cycle ; transformed cycle as in knowledge to manifestation and vice versa - such a lazy sinful person , seeker of sensory gratifications, lives uselessly. 

Thus we can say that our sensory reality is a series of observation of the artifacts and products of knowledge ; and these observations are there to refine our knowledge.




--
<center>
<h2>1.1<h2>
</center>
