<center>
<figure>
    <audio
       controls
       src="./2dot0.mp3">
          Your browser does not support the
          <code>audio</code> element.
    </audio>
</figure>
<h1> Chapter 2.0</h1>
</center>


Gita is a conversation between two Yogi's at a most improbable place in the middle of a war and a strange topic of conversation `Karm Yoga`. Both,  Krishna and Arjuna , were Yogies -  Arjuna , the biggest warrior , and trained by the very best;  likes of Guru Dronacharya and overseen by Bheeshma ;  Krishna , ` Maha Neetikaar` the biggest strategist and karma yogi by any means, by any standards.  In a way the entire epic of Mahabharata is to cradle this conversation;  a conversation between two Yogies. 

The third chapter of Gita,  the Karma Yoga is fully dedicated to this topic. And that is what I want to focus on in this section and sub sections. Before we jump to `Karm Yoga` , let me walk you through the context as quickly as possible say in three minutes or so. If you already read `Mahabharata and Gita`, feel free to skip to the main bullet point below .. 

In first chapter ,  the writer the poet,  Ved Vyasa  describes the battlefield `Dharm Kshetre, Kuru Kshetre` -  horses,  elephants and the young men and the women, eager  to test their ideas,  eager to take on each other. The leaders on the both sides pronounced the war with a roar of divine conch-  `Shankh Dhvani` and  Arjuna asked Krishna to take the chariot centre stage,  he wanted to see who are these people who are willing to put their life and blood in this war, knowing very well none stands a chance to compete with Krishna and Arjuna together,  then why are these people so eager to get into the dual?  But he doesn't see enemies out there. What he sees are the faces of his cousins, his teachers and mostly his friends.  Am I  committing a mistake?  The duality strikes and immediately without any thought, he tells Krishna- O  Krishna Are we on the right path? Or are we making a mistake? In fact, he thinks that even Krishna is making a mistake by enduring this war. 

Krishna is obviously surprised with this sudden change in In the mood, the sudden change in in the vibe and the sudden rise of weakness in Arjuna. As a friend, Krishna thinks about what Arjuna said and he allows him to make up his mind. Even in the middle of war, there is no rush. Krishna takes it as an opportunity for Arjuna to really understand who he is, what he feels and say what exactly he  wanted to say. 

Arjuna goes on to describe his thinking. He deems his family, his friends and his teachers as the most important aspect of his life.  If he takes on this war, he would be someone who destroyed the family - `Varna Sankar`. He had many ideas based on his upbringing - `Samskaras`  what he had learnt from the very best and he walks back in the rear side of the chariot and it sits there lifeless, as if the blood drained off his veins. Having seen armies, he finally says the words in the seventh verse of second chapter. He says ..

> Karpanya [by miserly] Doshas [weakness] Uphata [inflicted] Swabhavah [nature] , Prichami [I am asking] Tvam [unto you] Dharm [religion] Sammoodh [baffled] Chetah [in heart];
>
> Yat [what] Shreyah [honourable] Nishchitam [after deciding with convicetion] Bruhi [tell ] Tat [that] Me [unto me], Shishya [disciple] Te [your] Ahem [I]  Shadhi [instruct] Mam [me] Tvam [unto you] Prappanam [surrendered].
>
> I am inflicted by miserly weakness and I am asking you for my heart is baffled in the context of religion (what is the right path for me from religious standpoint). I am asking you to tell me the honorable path. I am your disciple and I surrender unto you. 

In a way, Arjuna is asking Krishna to review the situation again.  Maybe everything is not lost yet. Maybe we can save ourselves from making a grave mistake. And in doing that, we can save the family. Of course , Arjuna thought,  what else Krishna had say?  No one in the right mind can support the war as it is. And in this particular case, it's not even a war against enemies. It's the war within the family, against the very teachers who taught the art of war and all the friends there's no one who's unrecognisable. 

Krishna takes a pause. Now that he's been appointed  as a teacher, by no less than the biggest archer, the biggest warrior ever seen by the mankind. Arjuna himself is calling him a teacher. So he needs to think and decide the righteous path. Again, he weighs that the situation demands a quick delivery of the message. But at the same time, he's talking to Arjuna. So he needs to be detailed enough to convince a Yogi - `Nidrajayi Arjuna` -someone who had won the sleep itself.  Arjuna was an example of dedication, control and focus himself. So he takes his time and he explains everything in second chapter of Gita. 

Now,  many people say that second Chapter itself is the completion of Gita,  which is kind of true because Krishna covers everything, what he needs to say and what Arjuna  needs to hear. At the same time, he understands that it is  a lot. 

So, in the beginning of chapter three, Arjuna raises couple of questions. In fact, those questions are more like an allegation. He says 

>Jyasasi [better] Chet [if] Karmanh [from action] Te Mata [per your opinion] Buddhih [intelligence] Janardna [O Krishna];
>
>Tat Kim [then why] Karmani Ghore [ghastly actions] Mam [me] Niyojayasi [ you are engaging] Kesava [O Krishna] .

After hearing Krishna in chapter two, Arjuna  reaches the conclusion that whatever Krishna said, it meant that intelligence is better than actions. So, he says, If intelligence is better than actions in your opinion, O Krishna, then why are you engaging me in these acts of war, these undoable unthinkable actions. Having made himself a disciple of Krishna. He further goes on to say 

>Vya [your] Mishrena Eva [ Kinda mixed] Vakyen [sentences -> words] Buddhim [intelligence] Mohayasi Eva [you are kinda delusioning] Me [me];
>
>Tat [therefore] Ekm [one thing] Vad [tell]  Nishchitya [after deciding] Yena [by which] Shreya [better in the eyes of others] Ahm [I] Aapnuyam [I get].

Now, this was a real blow,  real allegation on Krishna. As I said, this is a conversation between two Yogies,  a fascinating conversation. This conversation is what Karma Yoga is all about. As we know there are many many types of yoga. In the Scripture, we start with Hath Yoga, Nyaan Yoga, Bhakti Yoga, and   Naad Yoga. And they say that Karma Yoga is the mother and father of all the yoga.  Krishna himself advocates karma yoga and in the context of Karm Yoga, Arjuna is  saying, your mixed messages are confusing me, you are saying many things . Therefore, decide one thing tell clearly  which brings me honour.  Arjuna is not asking for the Kingdom . All he is saying that I want honour in the in the eyes of others.  So, tell me one thing after deciding , that bring me the honour , that is appreciated by the historians after the war , which creates a legacy. 

So in way, Arjuna forced Krishna to be very decisive in this conversation. Didn't leave him any latitude, any wiggle room. Which, in fact, is a good thing for us, because most other scriptures often tread on the both sides of aisle leaving the followers confused and perplexed.  That said, Gita,  wholeheartedly welcomes all the seekers whatever path they take but it adds that all the other paths finally lead to `Karm Yoga`. Thus it makes sense to directly focus on the root to best utilize our time here on this planet. . 

Now, this conversation is is not based on any ego.  Arjuna is not trying to pull a fast one on Krishna. We do that many times but  Arjuna is serious . And Krishna understands that he probably said too much in too little time. And he understands that it may be difficult for Arjuna to comprehend this all. The reason  I'm saying this is if Arjuna himself, a Yogi, was unable to understand Krishna speaking face to face , what  chance do we stand to understand Gita from chapter two? So many people say that chapter two is pretty much everything that Gita has to say. The problem is there is just so much that even Arjuna had to take a break and dive deeper. So in chapter three, they take on the topic of karma yoga. And Krishna takes a step back. And he understands that maybe he needs to explain a little better. So here he says 

>Loke [in the world] Asmin [this] Dwi-Vidha [two kinds of] Nishtha [faith] Pura [previously] Prokta [said] Maya [by me] Anagha [O sinless Arjun];
>
>Jnana Yogena [with ritual of knowledge] Sankhyanam [by philospphers] Karm Yogen [with ritiual of actions] Yoginam [by Yogies].


So Krishna, having understood the confusion that still prevails in the mind of biggest warrior and his friend and he talks back to him with love and respect, he says - O sinless Arjuna , There are two types of faith in this world as told by me previously Nyana yoga for the philosophers and scientists and Karma Yoga for the Yogies - those who are connected to me. 


## What is `Karm Yoga`

Before we get into `Karm Yoga`, we first need to get comfortable with the idea that this life is a journey and we are working our way towards a destination. We may not be able to perceive this journey in terms of physical travel such as we sitting in an aircraft or driving on the road. The indication of this journey is in the passage of the time. Just like a physical journey, the time passes and the ever changing visuals from our window - our tiny box of physical reality. Nothing is ever standing still. And the fact that we are searching; looking forward to something . This suggests there is a destination. We don't know what the destination looks like or even what exactly we want from this destination but there is a journey, and a state that we are seeking. 

Breathe and let it sync in because this idea is in the basis of `Karm Yoga`. It is the foundation. I say let it sync in because it took me better part of last fifty years to recognize that I need to be driving my life. It is not a matter of chance or simply a matter of "happy goes lucky". No denial that the metaphor (happy go lucky) does work sometimes;  but luck is not a strategy. On the other hand not taking to the steering wheel or "self denial" may have serious consequences. Our goal is to survive to see that destination and in that lies the idea that we need to be effective in terms of strategies to make sure we reach the goal as quickly as possible; at least in this lifetime. That is because we don't want to get into the reincarnation discussion, just yet. 

If both above statements sound reasonable, that life is a journey and it has a destination , may be unknown at this stage, then we are talking. The question really is what is the shortest path that takes me to the destination and of course it takes me there alive. One more important criterion is there - the journey needs to be satisfying and the destination full of peace. I wouldn't expect it to be fun because we know journeys are kinda tough. If you have taken a overnight bus ride or flown a transatlantic long flight - you know what I mean. Even with all the infotainment, food and alcohol; it soon gets difficult. A stage comes when we just want to get off the flight. All those messages on your social media that tell you that this journey of life is fun, ask them to take a 17 hours non stop from SF to Delhi and check back with them six hours into the flight :-) 

Krishna says that this journey is very simple and straightforward. Do exactly what the situation demands. In that is the assumption that we must have a deep appreciation of our immediate physical reality because that is our little action box and that is where we got to know our next move. This simple ask, however, gets complicated because we are swayed with the desires. Think of desires as little detours on our path. Some of them go through a quick cycle of pain and we are back on the path. Some of them are like a maze that we are stuck for entire life and may be many many lives. You may say, what is the fun in such a simple life. Shouldn't we indulge a little bit. Absolutely. If the situation demands indulgence, the righteous action is "indulgence". But such indulgence needs to be not related to our desires. There are many many opportunities to enjoy this life righteously. In fact, there are more opportunities to enjoy a righteous path than the one with random detours or distractions. In fact, the biggest source of peace is in built into this path. And that is in appreciation of our internal knowledge. 

Now you may say, how can we act if there is no desire? In our normal experience, we do things because we desire something. Desire or passion is the drive that leads us to actions. This is exactly what we need to change to comply with `Karm Yoga`.  The change is so subtle that we can't even feel it yet so big that in there lies the keys to our true reality. 

There are four stages to develop the skill of acting without desires and even more importantly figuring out what the righteous action are for a given situation. Krishna says .. 

> Chatur [four] Varnyam [categories] Maya [by me] Srashtam [created by] Guna [qualities] Karam [righteous actions] Vibhagshah [in terms of division];
>
> Tasya [of that] Kartarm [creator] api [although] Mam [me] ; Viddhi [know that] Akartaram [I am non doer] Avayayam [and unchangeable]
>
> Four categories of humans are created by me based on the qualities of the people and their righteous actions. Though I am the creator of this categorization system, I myself am a non doer and unchangeable. 

### Service orientation 

If you are someone (like most of us) for whom, desire is a pre-requisite for the action, "Service Orientation" is the starting point. Good news is , it is the easiest. The idea is super simple. Look around for all the things you can do to pass your time and always prioritize those things that involve physically serving someone including yourself. Of course without any expectation of the payback. In fact there are lot of things that you can do to service yourself , your dogs , your family and your home.  You really don't need to sign up a volunteering mission in Africa if your own family is not getting enough of your attention . I mean if you volunteer , that's great but keep in mind, your actions need to be in your action field. Your own physical reality. I call this phase as something where we start seeking pleasure in chores. 

The beauty of this phase is it seems very hard to start one of these actions. Try cleaning up your garage. But once we do, the action itself pulls us in. We feel a strange peace when we successfully finish fixing our wardrobe. You look at your table with content when you rearrange the contents spread all over the place. There is a satisfaction in doing our chores regularly. 

The key to success in this phase is to notice this peace . Hold and enjoy it. And see how small chores adds up in untangling our life. In Hindu tradition, this phase is called `Shoodra` and there was a time when people started looking down upon this phase as someone who is doing menial tasks just because they are not super qualified to take on so called  bigger responsibilities, however, this is an essential phase because this is where we get the first exposure to "acting without desires" . If you are a procrastinator like me, I am sure you always want to put off your chores. There is no energy because energy in our system comes from the desires. In a way, this phases gives us the freedom from the idea that actions must be driven by the desires. 

On the other hand, there could be people or situations where we indulge in longer durations of menial tasks but we hate doing them. We curse and pity ourselves for being in such a misery. That is not what this phase about. In fact that is quite the opposite and creates great bondage. Not only does this phase gives us the taste of "actions without desires", it also tunes us to doing things alone; without the curse of association. I doubt there is any friend who had rather be with you doing your chores. You realize that the drudgery of life is something that you need to carry alone on your shoulders. In a way it is a very humbling experience. 

Goes without saying, this is not a water tight phase. It is not that we are blocked into this phase for a duration. Doing it consciously say for couple hours daily is all we need for few months. The idea is to establish a truth to ourselves that actions need not be driven by desires and to feel the satisfaction that comes from acting without desires. Thus even if you could afford to have someone run our errands, it is important to do them ourselves every now and then. 

### Skill Capture

One of the best way to focus on actions is to develop a skill. This is the way to enhance divine wealth what Gita calls `Daivy Sampad`. We will talk a great deal on this topic in next chapter; suffice to say here that skills must be developed secluded from the world in a clandestine manner. That is the best way to devote more time on skill building and not build expectations on yourself. 

As we start developing the skills, and get some initial success , you will notice that desires again start creeping in. Now they are aligned to the skills that you are building. If you are working on to be a coder , you will start dreaming about becoming the next google; if you are working on music, you will end up hosting concerts in your dreams. All good. The key is to know and tackle these desires on their merit. Again the skills that you will choose to build on must be grounded in your physical reality or else they might end up pipe dreams. Other thing that you will notice is the deep satisfaction when you are in the "act" of skill building and see some success. This is the most important aspect of this phase. We need to learn to harness this satisfaction. 

In fact , the idea of `Yazna` is nothing but this skill building pursuit. Krishna says 


> Saha [along with] Yajnah [ritual of actions] Prajah [community of followers] Srishtva [having created] , Pura [previously anciently] Uvacha [explained] Praja-patih [ a demigod in Hindu scriptures ];
>
> Anena [this way] Prasvisydhvam [ having attained more prosperity] Esah [ through this] Vah [they ] Astu [stayed as] Ishta [ desired things] Kama-dhuk  [ owner who enjoys his rein].
>
> Previously, in the ancient times `Prajapati` created the idea of `Yazna` - ritual of actions and explained it to a community of followers. Practicing this as a framework to build new skills, they all got their necessities and niceties and stayed satiated.

In Hindu traditions, this stage is also known as a trader `Vaishy`. In a way we are taking all that we need from `Bramha` - the system and building the skills that will manifest back into the system. 

### Application of skills

Just acquisition of skills is not the end of `Karm Yoga` ; we need to be able to deploy such skills righteously. As a matter of fact, the core conversation of Gita is about this aspect of `Karm Yoga`. Arjuna is the most skilled archer of his time and now he is at cross roads as to if or not apply his skills for a righteous cause. We very well know what Krishna advised him to do. 

In a way, holder of the skills has a solemn responsibility to apply the skills in a judicious and righteous manner. That is the reason lawyers and doctors are under oath to apply their knowledge for the right cause with impartiality. Journalists have a similar obligation. One of the reason we have so much trouble with the software and AI is that coders yet don't have such obligation. They are never given a lesson on ethics. Thus we see profit motivation taking a precedence of people's privacy and well being in social media. We see the drive towards an interface design that is often over immersive and click hungry. 

We briefly mentioned  in the last chapter that `Bramha` can assign us duties only if we have the skills.  The idea is to render those duties in an ethical manner. In the Hindu tradition, this stage is also called `Kshtriya`. By convention of old times, the word became synonymous with a warrior because that was the most sought after skill of those times but in truth, the meaning is NOT limited to the war or warriors. Anyone who is called upon by the system for application of their skills and who does that in ethical manner is a `Kshtriya`

The key aspect of righteous application of the skills is the idea that such choices , amidst conflicts in our tiny box - the reality as we perceive, exposes us to the underlying truth. Once we see pass through the conflicts and feel the true nature of reality, we are beyond desires. In fact , most of the conflicts of our tiny box are because of the ill placed desires.  In a way every skilled human is a warrior because the situation always demands fighting your on desires for the right cause. Your own desires for payback, fame and favors. Those of well being of your off spring. The good thing is `Krishna` assures to hold your hands if you ask for it. Every step of the way , he will guide you to choose the right path though the choice remains with you and the battle is not easy. 

Taking a righteous stance in a conflict (internal and external) is the set of keys that unlocks the door. And that is the reason Gita puts exclusive focus on deep appreciation of our perceived reality- our tiny box. 


### Riding the wave

The last stage is when we understand the true reality , having gone through the skill building and their righteous application. In this stage the `Karm Yoga` becomes a life style ; beyond a specific situation. We become the embodiment of `Bramha` and that is the reason this state is called `Bramhana`. Righteous actions are part of our life and style. Gita says, at this stage you are in position to decide wrong from right and impart that knowledge to the rest of the community. Actions , now , are no more a mandatory requirement for you but you still indulge in them to set up an example for the rest of the humans. The knowledge is self evident to you. You stay in ever lasting peace. At this stage you are not even a `Karm Yogi` - you are simply a `Yogi` - means connected. 


## A deeper dive into Actions v/s Outcomes

While we are on the topic, let us take a deeper look at the actions v/s expected outcomes. The idea is, not only focus on actions is liberating, chasing the outcomes on the other hand is futile. 

### Separation of Actions from Outcomes

The key to understanding `Karm Yoga` is that actions and outcomes are two separate entities. Think of a roulette table. Action is to put your money on a number. Expected outcome is you hit a jackpot . They don't have a cause and  effect relationship. To be correct from physics standpoint - Yes , action has a reaction. Means - when you put money on the table, table will push it up :-) but that is not the outcome we are talking about. The outcome that we are discussing has a degree of separation from the actions , it is  one of the possibility out of millions or possibilities if a multitude of the things get coincidental and sequential. With each degree of separation, the probability of favorable outcome reduces exponentially - such that, in real world , expected outcomes are as improbable as hitting a jackpot in a casino. 

Our senses chase certain outcomes. Outcomes that our mind deems better for the survival (or growth) of physical body. Based on the outcomes, we keep adjusting our actions hoping to hit  the jackpot. Continuing with our example - adjusting the action means we change the slot or the number that we put our money on - still hoping for the jackpot.  Our sensory focus always stays tied to the outcomes. And thus we miss all the action. 

>Test - in any gambling session, All you remember are the major wins - Your lucky number but you never remember all the numbers you put your money on and lost.  You don't remember the sequence that led to the win.  Try to remember next time you sit for a poker game - entire history.  Your focus will shift from winning the game to "how" the game works ?

Let us take another example from stock market. We invest in say Apple hoping the stock will go up after the new product launch. Our investment has no relationship at all as to what Apple is planning or how the overall market reacts to to the news. Our hope  (in this case) is as good as hoping for the jackpot . You may say that yes, you can predict what new products are likely. Yes you can, to some extent but reaction of stock market is like the spinning wheel.  If the stock goes up, we feel happy and claim a win. If it goes down, we take another action to sell the stock to stop losses. In a way, we have put the cart in front of the horse. Random outcomes govern most of our actions. We live in expectation of one outcome to another. We forget the action - means we still "act" ; but our focus is on "outcomes" - not "Actions"

> `Karm Yoga` is shifting our focus from "outcomes" to the "Action". 

### Another look at the Hypothesis. 

As per the hypothesis - the actions are driven by the [protected] knowledge. Just the way we can infer the existence of a Black hole by interpreting it's effects, observing our own actions can give us an indication on the nature of our own black-box, our [protected] knowledge. As you know , Black-holes are invisible to our senses or the tools that extend our senses because no information comes back from them. But we know their existence and we can tell let us say their mass, their angular momentum or even their entropy by observing their effects or the actions. 

This knowledge is hidden to our senses because senses are externally focussed on outcomes. Senses are information receptors of the conscious agent. Which is not bad because the primary purpose of senses is survival - not the "exit". The more we focus on worldly outcomes, more we are bonded to our sensory "reality". Which also means that with outcome based strategies, it is impossible to access internal hidden knowledge. 

In essence we must seek "Action" NOT the "Outcomes". Outcomes will be there but they are to be seen as by-products. The primary goal is to know yourself. So next time you go for a job interview, your focus should be what work you are going to do. Not the monthly compensation or perks :-) . In fact , voluntary service is the best way to get initiated in `Karm Yoga`.. As you get steadfast on this path , you will realize , even the nature of work is unimportant , what matters is you are constantly observing your "Actions" and are always eager to perform them. The best example is kids eagerly waiting for the play time. They don't care of the out comes. They don't even care what game. All they want do is to indulge in action - video games included :-) 

### Why righteous actions ?

Any action is good if the goal is to only know / understand [protected] knowledge. Doing "righteous" actions is a smarter way because the people around you will facilitate (if needed). On the other hand, if your actions are random, "outcomes focussed" people will hinder your ritual. As a `karmyogi` , you don't care about the outcomes, but people around you do. So , do the right thing unless you are living a solitary life in a Himalayan cave :-) . In fact, It is easier to do the right thing ...except when you are in a testing situation like Arjuna, that demands to take a point at your friends and relatives ; and teachers .. But such events are rare and think of them as a final test of `KarmYoga` - not the initiation. As a matter of fact, if your focus is what you are doing , it is very hard to do anything wrong. We normally get into immoral conduct when we are driven by desires. 

**Thus Krishna said to Arjuna ..**

>> If you win (in realizing your [protected] knowledge) , you will exit from the miseries of the cyclic nature, even if you lose , you will still have the wealth of this world to rejoice. And if you died, this body is anyways fungible. 

### Do I really control the Karma? 

Depends on who am I ? If I am physical body and mind then "No". In this case random outcomes control our actions. 

If I am the [protected] knowledge , then yes. 

This also means that the free will is contingent upon our definition of who we are. 

### Why is it encrypted to senses. 

The purpose of senses is constantly seek the environment to ensure our survival. So that we get a window to explore the self. Unfortunately, senses get tied to the sensory pleasures and lead our actions to accomplish more and more pleasurable outcomes. We get into the gambling game. Keep putting money in various slots in hope of hitting the pot. Before we know it, we start using senses solely for pleasure. Even the survival becomes secondary. In a way, we get addicted to favorable outcomes. At this stage, it is almost impossible for the senses to focus on "Actions". Thus the [protected] knowledge appears encrypted. 

`Karm Yoga` is thus a gradual process to retrain the senses away from sensory pleasures to focus back on `Karma`. Important thing to know is the problem really are not the pleasures. The problem is we got defocused. 

### Isn't it impossible ?

Yes it is. Detaching the actions from outcomes is as "impossible" as picking up a violin and become a musician the very first day. We need to think `Karm Yoga` as a skill. The ultimate skill that enables you to learn anything you want and finally know yourself. Thus it is a journey. 

### You may already be a `Karm Yogi"

If learning new skills comes easy to you; you may already be a `Karm Yogi`. You just didn't know it. And the training could be a bit misplaced. For example, the modern way to accomplish something is to set your eyes on a higher outcome. May be you want to become a successful you tuber. What you are told to chase is say a million followers. Once you hit that you are craving for ten million. Or you want to excel in sports. The coaching is to give you a bigger dopamine for more dollars, more recognition. So that you could let go immediate sensory pleasures in expectations for the ever moving line. . You work hard to accomplish your goals.

Krishna says - If you practice `Karm Yoga` for a worldly goal, you will easily get that. Means you focus on actions to say become a writer. You will become a writer. But all such gains vanish in due course. And you again start to accomplish something else - may be even bigger. You are already a `Karm Yogi` because you know how to control your senses and focus on actions. You are just striving for the lesser goals. In a way you are short selling yourself. Why not learn the "process of learning" itself. And access entire knowledge base that is already hidden in you. In fact, such short selling is the cause of all cycles. It creates a race among humans to do more of the less- to chase more and more lesser goals. It makes us seek higher and higher sensory pleasures. Bigger the rise, deeper the fall .. 

Same skill of learning, with a better coaching, can lead to eternal peace and fulfilling knowledge... All that when we get to the framework. 

## Elegance Test

Before we pursue the experimental test of the hypothesis - the idea must pass the elegance test. The model proposed by Gita is beautiful in the sense it uniquely empowers every individual to overcome the miseries of life and at the same time, it sets up the stage for a successful career as a residue. Our individual success leads to a world worth striving for. 

In essence - if Gita is True , it is a good news we all are waiting for.. 


