<center><h1> 2.1</h1></center> 

In the last section we expanded the hypothesis that [protected] knowledge can be interpreted by observing the actions. We also saw that the pre-requisite for observing the actions is to defocus the outcomes. Which means we need to detach ourselves from the sensory pleasures. This is very subtle change. The idea is not to hate the senses or the sensory pleasures. Survival is after all important. The idea is to start spending time with action - may be couple hours daily. Let us now see what happens when start focusing on actions. 

## Decrypting the [protected] knowledge.

When we start focusing on actions as a ritual, we get better at the doing a specific thing. Practice makes a man perfect. Observing the actions leads to continuous refinements of the actions til the actions become effortless. We might add more steps , revise some parts and finally  the thing becomes pretty much automated. 

>Doing a set of specific actions to refine and detail them to an extent they become effortless is called `Yajna`. 

### Actions to a unique skill 
The skill that we thus create is unique to us. We can publish the action list. But only we know how the thing actually works. Someone performing the same set of actions may or may not get the same skills. This is because actions when communicated in a format that senses could grasp , can not be too detailed or else senses lose interest. Even good visual communication (think "Game of Thrones") can only go to a level beyond which there is a scope of individual's interpretation. That space is where the receiving conscious agent is supposed to fill in their own knowledge --> decrypt a piece of their copy of [protected] knowledge. As they say, "there is always something to be read between the lines".

In essence skill is uniquely yours. No one can take away the swimming you have learnt . There is no way even for you to communicate how "you" swim. Because after a certain degree of detail, it [the knowledge] goes beyond sensory comprehension. 

>Lessons are NOT skills. Skill is an after effect of your practice. Good or bad. Skill is effortless orchestration of a set of actions - Violin creating the music in your hands , coordinated motion of entire body  to enable you skate board , dance , music , code - these are the skills. 

### Skills can't be communicated. 
You can inspire yourself to get into `Yajna` for a specific skill by someone performing the skill but you can't learn anything from the communication. Only way you perfect your skill is through  practice. There is no "communication capsule" that can transfer the skills. You can't start singing like Elvis by watching thousand youtubes of him. You will need to practice your self. You will need to fill out the configuration of music with your own voice. Filling your own voice at the right notes is what the "Practice" is for. 

>Inspiration is a "desire" to be something or like someone. `Yajna` is the way to be that thing but it will always be unique to you. 

### Skill is decrypted knowledge

The process of developing skills is essentially knowing yourself. Lets say you have perfected half marathon - it means you know how your heart rate will peak up in the beginning so you need to pace down. You also know, irrespective of competitors, you need to maintain your speed or else your knees would crack at 8th mile. Practice rounds have trained you what to eat, how much and when to sleep night before the big day. More refined the skill, better is your knowledge about yourself. 

If you make every aspect of your life a "skill", the entire routine, you will know a lot about yourself. Such life style is `Karm Yoga`.

### Skill to manifestation

In a way, skill is an automated module that can be played on a press of button to deliver something. For example - if you are a singer, you can sing on demand in any party , The act of singing on a venue is manifestation of your skill. When you sing someone can make a video. Your skill just manifested in to a million clicks :-). And not it is "literally" a click of the mouse! If you are a skilled carpenter, your skill can manifest into wooden artifacts. If you are coder, your skill manifests into Google.

The universe we observe through our senses is nothing but manifestations. Simple to complex. Automated. Interwoven. But they are all "Information". They can only indulge you or inspire you. 


