The Split - W.I.P

The egg cracks . Most of it is just waste. The white shell, the yellow liquid. Well; nothing is waste cuz you suckers going to eat it anyway! What I meant it had no life. And billions of them will never have one cuz they are hatched in the farms. Just like you. They are curated. They breathe air and they eat dirt. And they play games - on their tiddly toys; or in "Yo Yo land" - a metaverse I built at Belloney Labs - those junk mainframes you know - the ones left after the multics got shelfed. Oh that brings me to the metaverse - that's some cool stuff and you thought you knew everything bout it .. wanna build one ? The real one? The future of zee gaming!

Let me teach ya'al!

#Yo Yo Metaverse
Obviously , the first thing we need is the physics engine, so that we could build a non living space like the one we got around us. Well...living and non-living are debatable things but let's assume we are living. We need to simulate the rules of physics that basically means we have provisioned the solids, the liquids and the gases. And the gravity. Well , in Facebook Metaverse you may fly cuz there is no gravity (noobs) .. but it is not hard to imagine that we may easily hold your avatar to the ground (if we wanted to).. That is not much of a coding challenge . And you thought gravity was some pan universal space-time deep sci … sweet … it's just a line of code! Let's do it and see how it pans out ..
 
> A word about physical rules. → There is nothing sacrosanct here. Any set of rules are valid. They just lead to a different metastate. You obviously want to build something that is useful. That means you wanna improve on what you have ..just a slight change may be ! ..a better world than the one you are living in.
Now there are lot of weirdos aka "physicists" who shall waste their lives trying to figure out the Planck's length or the cosmological constant so that they could make cool youtube videos. You don't wanna do that cuz you are a builder . You make your own Yo Yo Land. Your goal is to land the future of this Game. Feel free to fork me on goathub ..

#Medium
So we figured out , we need three basic constituents - that is - air , liquids and solids - solids are something you can't pass through, liquids are something you can pass through but you will feel the touch, and gases ..duh .. you can of course pass through even without feeling the touch. When you come to my class , please don't leave your common sense behind .. That reminds me , let us put some common sense in this YO YO Land .. the basic rules .. such as "cause & effect thing" ! "Yo mamas" are supposed to drill these rules into your heads from the day you arrive in Yo Yo Land; just like "Yo daddy" is supposed to say "No" to everything you wanna do.


Ah yes. - "Yo Mama" is a role ; just like "Yo Daddy" and "Yo Teacher".  "Yo leader" is a role that is supposed to lead you onto a path that she never walked on :-). For example if this conversation was in Yo Yo Land , you will probably think of me as "Yo teacher" but I am not and we are talking in the real world . Or are we !

Anyways .. don't break your head on it. It's pretty basic stuff. These are simple statements written in a Mammal file. Oh - I forgot to tell you about Mammal ; it is somewhat like yaml but a lot less. Think of it as markdown of yaml - hah - that's stupid, I know but anyways.  

So I came up with this role thing last summer. I was thinking of kinda "code of conduct" but then I ended up watching "West World". Ain't Chris Nolan cool man! Didn't you see it? I guess it is still on HBO. So I ended up building a "Dynamic Conduct Engine" . Its like a narrative where you start every time you wake up and also it holds the basic routines of your acts. It ain't perfect but that is the cool thing about Yo Yo Land , you are not gunning for perfection here. You are actually running for confusion cuz the agents will find the best "drill" themselves. We are using Elon's hidden AI neural model cuz these days you just can't do any stuff with AI..but wait I am getting ahead of myself ! This is next level stuff. .. let us get back to our spatial mediums- The air, solids and the gases.

Absence of these three we shall refer to as Space. Just as three primary spatial mediums, we also need three sensors - that is touch , smell and taste. Touch primarily for the solids , taste for the liquids and smell for the gases. .. It's really that simple .. wait ..don't start writing poems on the beauty of the eyes .. they are just a sensor for light ..and we will know bout light down the line .. hang tight.

#Energy
Since we have the rules of physics active in our Yo Yo world (keep this in mind cuz I hate to repeat- forgive my nixy habits) , means we need to intro the idea of energy to allow inhabitants abide by the physical rules. You can't sell me a refrigerator if there ain't no electricity. Every time you need mobility in this place, to feel the solids , liquids and gases , to cut through them , to reshape them (without somehow bending the laws aka hacking the mainframe), you need energy. You can harness energy through say lighting a fire or drinking an energy potion. Yes, you can burn anything here. You don't need a burn permit. And of course you may channel the energy say electricity through a wire. Or a train of photons - people in Yo Yo land call it light .. morons. Here is the simple rule - I need energy to follow Yo Yo rules. You can't ask me to walk a gravity laden land if you don't give me energy in my muscles. You may charge for it ; crude is already hitting hundred dollars a barrel and guess who is smiling now? Putin or Biden ? Stop - no politics on this post ..but you know the discussion on energy always gets into the politics. Because this is what we all want. You thought we wanted gold. Hell no .. we want oil! How do you think I am going to go on a random drive this summer with Costco selling black gold for over six bucks a gallon. Are you crazy .. stop ... stop .. change the topic...

#Senses
So we got all the non living things - the five elements → solids , gases , liquids, space and energy . What about the avatars - the players ? Well you can call them "conscious agents" if you like but it's just a fancy name for a slightly more convoluted code. Well they got a sense for each of the spatial elements. Pay attention ? I hate to repeat ..
And they have a role to play. Don't worry about the Dynamic Conduct Engine yet. That needs little bit of training into the Neural Networks but that ain't important. The point is they will learn as they go along and come up with their own Conduct.
The cool thing about senses is they ..and this the key element .. don't miss this point …
Senses are to - well - sense everything external but they are not capable to understanding who you are! For example your eyes can't see your own face directly. You can't tell how bad you smell . You can't tell how loud and boring you sound. You need "others" to tell all these things about you - to you !
Why ? cuz if we let the agents know who they are ; then they will figure out their code in no time (After all they are self learning machines) . And that would be the end of the game. You want agents to know everything else but themselves.
In fact , you want to hide even yourself from the agents - you the "Yo Yo Builder" . Again Why ? Try to apply your brains - don't expect me to tell you everything - huh.
#Memory
The next step is how does the agent remember the interactions with these spatial objects and other snippets of code like them - basically a log. We need the agents to remember their immediate reality , to harvest it for survival . That is the reason we need a dedicated log file. I know we can have just one if we give each agent an ID but don't jump ahead of yourself please. And we need this log file in the cache memory. After all these agents are going to fight for their lives . You don't want them struggle like a 32 bit machine trying to write on Hacker Noon's new editor :-)
How about we put this log file on a blockchain → a universal history. And let the agents show "proof of work" to add something to it. They need to suffer to add their names to the universal memory log. Everyone can't have a wikipedia page dedicated to them just cuz they were born here. They must do something worthwhile to earn their place . But why any rational being shall choose to suffer just to have their name recognized by random unknown agents ? That means we need to add something more to ID. ID is not just a name , it is - well - we shall see down the line …
#Intelligence
This memory is designed to be "real-time" to act spontaneously for obvious needs of survival. Agents can of-course use it for other needs when there is no threat . When it works in real-time , like a Unix daemon:-) , we call it "intelligence".
But intelligence is NOT for survival of your physical body alone.. Why not define "Survival" as your entry into "Wikipedia". If we defined survival as "recognition" ; we can then force the agents to work hard to get their names in the "Universal Memory Log" sitting on a blockchain somewhere in North Dakota cuz China ain't allowing no more blockchain wackadoos.
So you see the difference in memory versus intelligence ? No ? - chug along .. it will come to you ..it just takes time to build "Yo Yo anything"
#Autonomy and Sleep
Obviously we can't put too much of bulky storage in there because we need to optimize for for Survival. Which translates into → optimize for mobility and spontaneity. Why not give a small, real-time fast memory (something like a gig of RAM) and provision a mechanism to process the data with global compute when agents are inactive - let us call it "Sleep".
So we build a localized memory and a mandatory sleep. In a way, the agents are free to roam around and explore in search of survival in the Yo Yo land; but we get to know all they did when they fall asleep and sync the data up to the cloud. And that is where we can guide the agents as to what what is there next big move. We may assign them tasks. We want to keep the control to some extent but we do want to give the agents a sense of autonomy. A false autonomy - just like when you browse the web. You feel no one knows but every night Google and Facebook churn our your eye movements. They decide your next move and that is what you see on your landing page - they are al l connected. Netflix , Amazon , Spotify Instagram - you name it . Under the hood, they share all data - your movements , your orders - your reads and your steps - you name it .
The design of sleep interface is probably the most complex part of the Yo Yo verse. There are many sub-modules of this interface that act from ingesting the data , processing and optimizing and rebuilding the scenarios for the next set of actions. Of course, agents believe it is a necessity to maintain physical body - ha ha - least they know that their perception of physical body is just a mumbo jumbo of pixels on our screens. But , we do need to make sure that inhabitants are safe from predators during the sleep cycles.
Back into our world - You might think sleep is just a way to rejuvenate our tired muscles but if we were to waste a third of our life in simply maintaining this body, that is an awful design of a machine. Given the complexity of our bodies , it is hard to imagine that the maker would commit such a design blunder. Those who have done an over-nighter, they know we roam around like zombies the very next day:-) Totally disconnected from the things around us. No amount of rest can get us the connect that sleep brings. We can die much faster on account of sleep deprivation than going without food or water. So sleep is special. It is a special interface. We can change our attitude towards sleep if we think of it as our connection to divine internet. This is where all our bodily application are updated over the air :-)
You may say what is the point of building such a virtual world where we have no constant contact. We are not with our avatars all the time - as in immersive games - "Call of Duty". Well, we already do such things when we are building what we call "digital twins" to solve real world problems . And pretty soon they will be common place. For example the digital twin of busy intersections are already capturing data to train the self driving cars. Who knows, soon your digital twin might attend work meetings while you are enjoying thanksgiving meal with your family ..or vice versa , depending on what your priorities are :-) Instead of swiping left and right on tinder, you might want to have your digital twin meet up your date first to check the compatibility - whats the point of meeting if he is not into Dungeons and Dragons-) . Bottom line is we are reaching a stage where real and digital are getting asynchronous but they co-exist.
This asynchronous design is what allows the illusion of autonomy or free will - the greatest gift of our lives. Even if it is an illusion it is something to cherish, In a way, sleep is our autonomy shield. A much better design than our smartphones where online and offline is kinda mixed and messed up (:-
Now you might think we are building VR ..aha .. .you didnt pay the attention . The metaverse is not a VR. It is the egg that we are building around us. We are partially living in it because the life is still not ready to break the shell. Once it is ready , the shell would break. Most of us say 6.9 billion shall be a waste - the broken shell , the yellow liquid. Chosen few had flown to Mars with Elon Musk .. the new species .. the next life . That is the split … it takes many full moons to fill up the guts of this night . But it always does - humans were that among animals and natives of Yo Yo land are the next .. you all the hackerNooners .. enjoy.
#Time
The fact we have a small but efficient local memory means we need to offload the irrelevant data rather quickly. How do we do that? We need a mechanism to purge that cold useless data from agent memory and retain only hot relevant data. No one wants to keep the memories of their ex alive :-) In fact being able to forget is a necessary aspect of healthy active life. So how do we enable the agents to forget. That's where we built the notion of time. A chronological mechanism to keep track of our rotations. Just like a spinning vinyl.
If that is the case, why can't we traverse the "time". We can go back and forth in other spatial mediums such as solids and liquids or air but we can't go back and forth in time. The answer is simple, because time is a construct of memory. It is not a physical element. In the context of memory, we can sure go back and forth in time but we haven't yet provisioned a physical element for time. In a way, it is the fourth dimension but we don't want our agents to wander off in unnecessary timelines physically. We want them grounded to the physical reality of three dimensions. So we need to keep this fourth dimension hidden from the senses. In our current design, our agents can't even handle the complexities of three dimensions , so there is no point exposing them to fourth. May be in some future project , we will build a four dimensional metaverse :-) but that would definitely mean revisiting the eight basic rules.
Thus , in current design, time is a derived idea, it is not a fundamental aspect of material nature. It is a mechanism to keep our intelligence fresh. That is the reason we lose sense of time when we are sleeping. You know what I mean if you ever snoozed the alarm a winter morning :-) Eight hours pass in a jiffy. Of course, in modern society, where scheduling and calendaring is an important aspect of life, we have built hundreds of tools around it to keep reminding us that tax date is approaching fast :-) That daily scrum call , 8 am every morning ..sucks :-)
So in addition to senses the concious agent now has a small local mind to navigate the survival through what we call Buddhi - intelligence. This is basically to receive data from the sensors and then we have the access to massive connected compute through a sleep interface what we refer to as Chitta. And we have time because we want our local memory to be efficient. In a way time is a mechanism to purge the unnecessary and retain the relevant.
#Fickle Mind - Mana.
Turned out with all the sensors as well intelligence, the agents are still not excited to engage with the virtual world. The metaverse is turning into another "Second Life" ; there is no transformative engagement. So we need to do two things - First to incentivize developers to build more immersive manifestations and second, we need to create a fickle mind in conscious agents. A faculty of mind that wont let them seek peace; rather make them chase new things , explore new locales, smell new scents, drink new potions , new cocktails- fickle mind. This is what Gita refers to as Mana. Mana is the seat of curiosity. Intelligence is to Chitta - the global compute, what curiosity is to Mana - the fickle mind. Stabilizing the curious Mana is an important prerequisite of a stable mind Sthit-Prizan . As we saw in the first verse of this chapter ..
Prajhati [ gives up ] Yada [when] Kaman [desires] , Sarvan [all] Parth [ O Arjuna ] Manogatam [one who is beyond fickle mind];
Krishna used the word Manogatam that means someone who is gone past the fickle mind.
Important thing to note is that both Buddhi - intelligence and Mana - curiosity are aspect of our material nature. They are not to be confused with the knowledge. They are ,however, important tools to decrypt the knowledge - Atma.
Let us now look at the last part of eight fold nature - Ahmkara. In Sanskrit , the meaning of Ahm is "Me" . And Kri is the root for the word Kriya which means doing or creating. Thus the word Ahmkara literally means "creating me". This last core service is what brings life to the metaverse otherwise its just a bunch of lifeless elements and compute..
#Identity - Ahmkara.
Implementation of fickle mind isn't that hard. It is basically to randomize the focus but the question is how do we incentivize the developers build more attractive and immersive manifestations. Turns out an amazingly simple idea works like a charm. A like button - as in "thumbs up" :-)
You know what I am talking about. The facebook "like" button. And you guessed it right, no one thought about the "unintended consequences". This simple "like" button captured the imagination of entire metaverse because if you don't vote for something with a like, it inherently means a "dislike". This simple like button led to excessive inflation and kinda distorted our immediate reality and morphed into something called "identity". Gita calls it Ahemkara. Identification with friends , family , nation , tribe , race and species. And thousands of other things. The things that we like and the ones we don't. In a way, this is what we perceive as who we are .
Purists called it a bug but this is what brought life to the metaverse. Others called it expression! Purists call it "ego" others call it freedom. Jury is still out meanwhile the like button is already being liked by three billion agents :-) I guess facebook has three billions monthly users now ! And there seems no sign of a slow down.
The growth of identity across entire virtual world creates three more bugs - we already know about desires and Gita's main focus is to weed them out. The other three are fear, anger and jealousy . We will talk a lot about these three bugs in next section. Suffice to say here that these three collectively give rise to Matrix - what Gita refers to as Maya.
So we have a ready concious agent ; with senses to observe the elements and other manifestations, intelligence to gain information, deep mind to process the information with global compute , work organs to interact with the elements and manifest , curiosity to indulge and an identity that narrows our focus - as to who we are ? Looks like we have a good design :-)
#Intelligent design v/s evolution
Well, you may say this sounds like an intelligent design ; yup we have a super intelligent design, I say this not because Krishna said so . I say this because this is what I see in what we are doing. Given what we did with compute in last thirty odd years , do we have any doubts that we will build not one but thousands of such virtual realities. With different sets of physical rules. We have transformed machines to intelligent machines and them to virtual intelligent machines - from post office to virtual post box on email server ; from real to online retail . Does anyone has a doubt that we all collectively - and that includes trees in our back yard because they fix our air - they too are partners in this rise or you may say crime :-); that we all are collectively building a metaverse. A metaverse of gargantuan size.
We are collectively evolving into a new virtual world. We are basically recreating what we are. We are building super conscious agents. We are transforming ourselves into the God. But all this is what we call evolution because we need to iterate endlessly to get to a better design. One that sticks. It took Apple thirteen iterations to get to iPhone 13. Every time thousands of developers working collaboratively to improve a teeny tiny bit. One thing at a time. We can start with say twenty core services and give similar senses to our agents. It might be a good idea to add electricity and internet as a core sensor in future projects and see where it goes but for now, actually for millions of years the design with these eight core services seems to be flourishing. Ashtdha Mool Prakriti.
The iterations are key to getting to this design. The cellular life probably has no identity and a single sense for liquids, we don't know. The point is we are evolving , always evolving , "Second Life" failed but "Grand Theft Auto" is working. Play station home failed but Horizon home from facebook might work, who knows what is next chapter after self driving cars. I am already investing in eVTols - the air taxies. Arriving at a design that looks intelligent is an evolutionary process. Only the best and fittest survives.
We may kid ourselves into thinking that our current state of evolution is somehow special. At least assume that we are hitting exponential in terms of evolution. We do have exponential opportunities just like we always did, always had. We are increasing say the carbon content but in terms of change this is nothing compared to when green population inundated this entire planet into a living pool of oxygen. Our silicon based compute is sure a major step forward but we should not forget that our long gone ancestors must have developed a carbon based compute , our own neural network and intelligence. Building our frontal cortex was as much a collective breakthrough as the integrated circuits. Who knows, how many times we have renewed our virtual world, every time a new layer just like an onion and it never stops.
If the question is are we in a virtual world? The answer is another question :-) Aren't we the agents that we only built and are continuously improving ? And aren't we always split between our real and virtual worlds. Overlapping , superimposing each other? But even more important and the real question is what ensures perpetuity of this model - this ever evolving metaverse with eight core services ? And that takes us to the esoteric debate on reincarnation ..
#Physical Perpetuity - procreation.
In order to understand the perpetual nature we need to first look at the survival. What does it mean to survive? We know for sure we want survival more than anything else. It is part of our design. But when we seek survival , aren't we actually craving for perpetuating our identities. And we are willing to sacrifice things for the sake of greater survival. For example, god forbids, if we are in a situation to choose between life and a finger , I am sure we would let go the finger. Sad it may sound, but none of the parts are as important as the whole. In fact, if we have a choice to ethically transplant a new organ that is better than what we currently have , we will all stand in line to get the new one . Just like a new iPhone :-). That is what is the promise of synthetic biology. We are at the cusp of making designer organs. ..
In a way the survival is nothing but holding on to our greater identity. If our identification with a group or say a nation is greater than our own body, we will gladly sacrifice our body for the sake of perceived greater good. If I remove my identity from myself , my name, my race, my nation, my address - is it me any more ? Well , my voice , my finger prints, the whole biometrics - DNA is my ID . Should I say , my physical body too , is my identity. I am continuously busy in maintaining , improving , harnessing and evolving these identities. And that exactly is the meaning of survival. Thus survival is about holding on to as many identities as we can in the order of precedence - from what we perceive as most sacred to the least . In that sense , exit seems like giving up all our identities. An opposite to what I am currently doing .. Gita says it is not possible. Simply because it is against the basic rules.
If we built a system that prioritizes survival beyond anything else , how can we exit? The intelligence we built in the system means that it must survive my IDs at any cost in the order of my attachment to them. No matter whatever be the physical laws. Weather you design a system like Gita suggests - the eight fold nature ; or you have another set of rules - say ten basic elements and ten primary senses ; as long as there is intelligence in the system, and it is ordained to survive, it will device a way to survive . Which means our identity should never die.. And that is what we are doing and we call it "procreation and reincarnation". As we said before, the model needs to explain the birth and demise .. Let's take a quick look leaving the details to later chapters ..
In a self perpetuating system like us, that ensures an identity as part of the basic design; by definition identity must be protected because that is what survival is. Losing our identity is the real death. As expected, our intelligence finds the way out through reproduction. If we can pass on our identities to our progeny we can entertain the idea of perpetuity of the identities. In a way, we need children as bearers of our identities - the nationality, the religion, family name , ownership, even our genes and micro biomes - we need them so that we could physically exit.
Intelligence prioritizes this by attaching orgasmic pleasure with it - the act of reproduction. Sexuality is deep rooted into us just like hunger, breathing and thirst. Intelligence deems it so important that it doesn't even care to ask us, take our permission. Just as a new born knows where to find the milk, the onset of puberty automatically ripens us for the procreation. This part of he design is self evident. There is no prize to be won in saying that we protect our children more than our own lives because they are the keepers of our identity. We see our own replica in them. There is no bigger sacrifice than to put our child in harm'sway. Our offspring is our biggest asset.
In a way, if you want to check out how the world sees you, you can objectively look at your children. They are our true selfies :-) .. And of course no prize in telling you who to blame if you see an obnoxious little brat in your teenager :-) . Thus if we identify ourselves with our physical body, the nature has already planned a succession for us - our physical identities. Doesn't this mean that we should let go our physical bodies as soon as we bear children. Obviously we need to stick around for some time to train them , help them find their footing into our tiny box but also this is the time nature allows us to reflect on all the shortcomings we had growing up. Every time we tell our children to not make a mistake we are actually reminding ourselves of the mistakes we made. Thus our child is our best teacher. The time that we are spending in raising our kids is our window of opportunity to reflect on the mistakes we made.
The next question is, what if we get to singularity ?
#Singularity
As we know, the idea of singularity, is the holy grail that will have us win over the physical death. You may say , what if we are able to reach singularity, won't we want to live for ever ? Wouldn't we want to replace every part of the body with a better designer organ and continue to prolong our stay ? Which also means we will need to stop procreation. Thus the idea of everlasting life , necessarily means the loss of the best joy and learning opportunities. We don't know if or when we will reach singularity but we can sure imagine a life without the pleasure of kids. And of course the end of sexual pleasure. And what is the point in sticking around if we already have the ability to pass on our identity to a new body.. I doubt anyone in their right mind would wish to live for ever without the basic pleasures of life. Thus the idea of singularity, at least from ever lasting life standpoint is quite misplaced.
#Reincarnation
The other side of the coin is - what if we identify our selves with the inner knowledge. Procreation kinda ensures perpetuity of our physical identities but what if I identify myself with my Atma. Now, this is the part that is not self evident, just like the knowledge itself is not self evident. We can't even communicate how we swim than how do we communicate what happens to our inner knowledge after our physical death. What happens to all the skills we decrypted, all the bondages we made. Now this is the quest that is worth a Nobel Prize :-)
Gita proposes that we can change this body like garments. And we receive new bodies.. Krishna says the golden rule of our metaverse is ..
Vansansi [garments] Jeernani [dilapidated] Yatha [ just as ] Vihay [ give up ] ; Navanni [new] Grinhati [receives] Narah [a man] aprani [others]
Tatha [similarly] Sharirani [bodies] Vihah [giving up] Jirnani [dilapidated] ; Anyani [other- new] Sanyati [accepts] Navani [new] Dehi [bodies].
As a person puts on new garments, giving up old used ones. Similarly we accepts new material bodies , giving up old and useless ones. In a way we let go our old bodies because the old vessel is not able to boil the newer ever evolving realities.
This aspect of the metaverse is a flawless design. Having gone through our iterations of skill building in current life . And than reflecting on our three dimensional real replicas - our children , all the mistakes , all the good - we now have gained a lot better view of our tiny box. Can we apply these skills in a new reality ? Do we need a better physical vessel ? May be we need four arms and ten heads :-) or may be our decrypted skills are best suited to fly across the oceans , like a bird.
Gita says, the new vessel we receive, is based on our Karma. You may ask who does this evaluation. The true answer is no one knows. But we can argue that if I am not promised a new body of my choice, why would I gladly pass on all that I have to my children? . The equations must balance even if I am unaware of them. It just doesn't make sense that nature would provision such a pleasure with the idea to let go everything that I so painfully collected (in terms of my identities), while only choice I have is to rot in my grave.
There must be a good reason that we all want to procreate and then spend rest of the lives taking care and raising our children. And guarding them. Are we backing up all our data in primordial clouds to restore it in a lot improved physical device. A device that is better suited to what we intend to do. If all you wanted is to travel to new places in this life, may be in next life you wanna be a migratory bird - a black swan may be. If all you wanted here in this life is to cause pain to others - may be you are looking forward to a shape of a scorpion. And if all you wanted was to eat and sleep - what is better prized life than a lazy bamboo eating Panda :-)
Whatever be the shape or size of our new vessel , we know for sure that we got to our tiny box - our current reality by a chance , the roll of the dice. We didn't choose our parents, nor did we choose where we are born. We may call it destiny for lack of a better scientific term. Or we can say we haven't collectively looked at this topic from a scientific standpoint just because it is beyond our sensory perception. Isn't that should be the reason that we need more research on this because science is ultimately that takes us beyond what meets the eyes - like the quantum world or even electricity.
More importantly , I have no reason to not believe that the system that brought me here , also ensures an appropriate destination for me. In a way , the wheel of time - Kaal Chakra, must be a much superior design that I don't yet understand. Just like I don't understand how your smart phone carries a vastly superior CPU than my just ten years old desktop :-). The question is do we want to understand this aspect. If yes , where should we start. That answer seems pretty simple - our journey begins right at our home. Our inner knowledge.
To recap - an immense pleasure if associated with reproduction and the very idea that we can pass on all that we have - wealth , name , responsibilities - pretty much all that is identified with us to your offspring. And also at the same time get a fresh set of garments. Kinda win win situation. Fresh name. Fresh locale. Fresh body to start afresh. Only thing that remains intact with us is our copy of inner knowledge. It carries with it all the bondages we made. All the skills we decrypted. In other words we carry our Karma . It conveniently forgets the set of all identities we had because we already passed them on. We get a new body in exactly the same way ; the way we pass on our identities. In a way sexuality is a Yazna to manifest our own avatars into a new world where our physical garments gotten old. Kaam Sutra calls it the most potent Sakaam Yazna. We will talk about Sakaam and Nishkaam Yazna in the next chapter. And this responsible passage of our current identities allows us to seek a fresh start. A start that we prepared for all this life.
Now you may say what if we die without bearing the offspring. Lot of people do that in accidents or otherwise. The scripture says that we can't get a proper exit and thus proper set of new identities if we failed to properly pass on our current ones, but that is something beyond the scope of this book. What really concerns the scope of this title is the question ; did we really exit ? Even if we let go our identities , we are still carrying on our Atma - the inner knowledge than aren't we stuck here ? Aren't we stuck with same laws of physics ? And with the same cycles of happiness and pain. Gita says - yes we are. Then what exactly is the exit. Gita says that exit is in understanding this system. Play it like a game. Which is possible by first knowing our own inner, protected, immutable and encrypted copy of knowledge. And Gita proposes observing the actions driven by our black-box that is Karm Yoga as only path to it.
#Wheel of Time - Kaal Chakra
The cycle of our inner knowledge - Atma through infinitely many births is what is known as Kaal Chakra. Krishna tells Arjuna , that its not that I was not there in any times or you were not there or all these enemies that are standing in front of you to fight were not there. Nor will there be a time when any of us doesn't exist. We all go through this endless cycle of physical births and deaths. Thus it is not appropriate to lament for the loss of physical bodies . In that sense trying to hold on to the physical bodies is like hoping to never change your clothes; . This is probably one of the boldest and biggest idea of Gita ... Krishna says ..
Na [never] Tu [but] Eva [certainly] Ahem [I] Jatu [at any time] Na [not] Asam [exist] Na [nor] Tvam [you] Na [nor] Ime [these] Jan-Adipah [kings] ;
Na [never] Cha [also] Eva [certainly- all these] Na [not] Bhavishyamah [shall exist] , Sarve-Vayam [all of us] Atah-Param [here after] .
Never was there a time when I didn't exist, or you didn't exist, or all these kings; nor in the future any one of us shall cease to be.
So with this design we have a self sustaining ever lasting meta verse from both physical bodies as well as our internal knowledge - Atma . The eight fold nature - Ashtadha Mool Prakriti ensures perpetuity at both physical and beyond physical and defines our grand universal manifestation. I know there are many significant and trivial questions about the implementation of reincarnation and other things. And also we still didn't address how to approach the true exit - Nirvana . We will address many aspects of the approach in next section where we reflect on Saakam and Nishkaam Yazna. And also take a deeper view of buggy aspects of our tiny box - that turns this little beautiful world into what we call Maya - Matrix .
