
## Yajna

Before we get into Sakaam Yazna, let us take a look at the Yazna once again. If you want to build anything, you first need to know how to build it. Be it a song, a painting , a car , a rocket ; the process of knowing and building the right configuration that serves the purpose of what we are building, is an iterative process. No matter how much you read about something, you can't get the thing right the very first time. There is number of iterative cycles you need to go through, before you could hit the home run. These iterations are what we call practice. As we saw in the previous chapter, every practice round; every iteration is in a way, a process of decrypting the knowledge. As we also saw, this knowledge is not evident to us but we know it is there. 


`Yajna` is thus the process of decrypting a piece of [protected] knowledge. Converting it into a skill and then manifesting something more inspiring than what you consumed. 

You may say , why do all this. Why should we try to manifest at all , or even better , just not do anything. The simple answer is because it is fun to do things. Sitting idle is neither fun nor easy. Krishna says, there is no way we can sit idle. He says... 


>Na [nor] Hi [certainly] Kashchit [anyone] Kshnam [a moment] Api [too] Jatu [at any time] Tishthati [stays - sit down] Akaram Krit [doing nothing];
>
>Karyate [forced into] Hi [certainly] Avashah [helplessly] Karma [actions] Sarvah [All] Prakriti-Jaih [born of their nature] Gunaih[qualities]

>  no one can sit idle even for a moment, at any point in time. All of us are forced into actions based on the qualities born out of our nature. Our nature as we described in `Ashtadha Mool Prakriti` - the core services of five sensory mediums such as air , water etc and three that are beyond our perception - fickle mind - `Mana` ; Intelligence - `Buddhi` and Identity - `Ahemkara`. 
>

Thus we are anyway forced into actions. If that is the case, why not build something. Thus manifestation is what symbolizes the conclusion of our `Yazna`.  We  get four  things  out of Yajna. 

- A piece of decrypted knowledge that stays only with you. 
- An artifact for sensory consumption. For your  own self or other conscious agents. 
- Peace for you as long as you are consumed in the actions. Even if you didn't want to do it in the beginning , as you indulge in the actions , the peace starts flowing in. You lose sense of time. 
- Help - Your practice pulls you in. As if someone is holding your hand. Giving you the clues. Game has help built into it. As you cross one bridge, your sight automatically clears up for the next. After few rounds, you don't even need to look at the manual anymore. You kinda start knowing what is the next thing. 

### Sakaam Yajna 

You can choose to attach a favorable outcome with your manifestation. Means you can make a wish that the book you wrote, will sell a million copies. It has nothing to do with your book. If there are a million seekers, you will feel happy. If there is no taker, you will curse Amazon:-) Means cycles of pain and happiness. If you look closely , the idea of more copies sold , or more money made or more power is not about the objects that we are desiring or manifesting as an outcome of this ritual of actions ; we are actually enhancing our identity. We want a million clicks on the song we just posted on you tube, for what ? Are we so passionate about the song that we want every one to hear it or we are seeking a new "super youtuber" Identity. If we are truly passionate about the message or the song, we would just put it there without our name attached to it . Wouldn't we ? 

Thus `Sakaam Yazna` - a ritual of actions for a target goal is nothing but adding a new dimension to our identity. As we said earlier, sexuality is the ultimate sacrifice for the sake of identity. We are literally handing over our wealth, our name, even our bodies in the act of reproduction. Thus `Kaam Sutra` calls sexual acts as the most potent of `Sakaam Yazna`. It is through this we pass on all we have. 

Krishna says if you indulge in `Sakaam Yazna` , you will easily get what you want but such gains add to the cycles of happiness and pain. Why so ? ..

If you want your manifestation (say the book we were talking about) to be successful, you will put in more effort in it but you will also carefully withhold something so that it doesn't become a sensory overload. Which means most of your focus shifts to the configuration that is best consumed. And the way you package he content rather than the content itself . Is it going to be a hard cover or audible? Publish on Amazon yourself or run after a publisher ?  What is the best price ? What "information" you put on the cover ? Effectively you are spending more and more time in decorating the information than the knowledge that you are unlocking. More effort you spend on improving the consume-ability , more you are raising your expectations. A million copies , ten million clicks ... Not only you are spending less time on actual content (practice), you are raising your own bar of happiness. Result can be a huge elation or big despair - beyond your control. BTW there is nothing wrong if you are into it to play the game but know that it is a game with random results as soon as the outcome expectations go beyond a certain degree of separation from the work you been doing. 

The bigger the expectations, less likely they are to manifest. Effectively what you learn from such Yajnas is what "Not to do"  or make you action less. Whereas if you went in with a low or no bar, you will always be in for the actions. 

### Nishkaam Yajna 


If you choose to attach no identity with your manifestation - it becomes `Nishkaam Yazna`. But that means it is to defy the rules of the metaverse. Isn't that  be like bending the laws ? Then what is the way out ? Here is a genius idea . If we expand our identity to this entire universe , that is we take on the identity of `Bramha` , in that case we can get ahead of cyclic nature of our reality. It seems kind of exact opposite of "no identity" at all but if you look deeper, identifying with `Bramha` is pretty similar to losing your set of identities. The best part is there is no rule to not expand your Identities. In fact that exactly is what we try to do all our lives - we start with intense focus on our own body ; gradually we start identifying with family ; then with race or religion and finally with nations or multi-nationals :-) If we go beyond this and take the entire world as our own self, our work , our manifestations will be in line with what universe needs us to do and that means, as we discussed in last chapter, we get "potluck table" access to the entire knowledge verse. 

Krishna suggests that three basic behaviours put us on the path to identifying with `Bramha` - They are going beyond desires - `Asakta` , free from the curse of association - `Mukt-Sangha` and `Sam-aachara` - same compassion for every being - from as little as an ant to the biggest elephant in the room. These three qualities are not born out of our physical nature but we can harness these qualities by bringing our focus back to actions. Krishna says 

> Tasmat [therefore] Asaktah [detached] Satatam [constantly], karyam [as duty] Karam [righteous work] Samachar [perform with equanimity];
>
> Asaktah [unattached] Hi [certainly] Acharan [performing] Karma [righteous work], Param [the supreme] Aapnoti  [achieves] Poorushah [a person].
>
> Therefore , without attaching to the fruits of activities, one should act as a matter of duty with equanimity. Such detached deliverance of duties identifies one with the supreme. 

The next obvious question is how do we get to this door. The localized identities and the grip of three bugs - fear , anger and jealousy are too strong. We can't get rid of desires. Do we need a divine intervention ? The good news is we all get that divine intervention and that is what is know as love. Krishna calls it `Anuraga`. We will talk about `Anuraga` in the next chapter. In a way, the path to exit, too, is built into us,  all we need to do is "turn inside".

Now , before we take onto universal identity ; we need to prepare ourselves. That is where "service orientation" fits in. If we can't even help our family or even our own body, what chance do we stand to take on universal responsibilities. Charity begins at home. That is the reason Krishna said .. 

> Yah [ one ] Tu [ but ] Atma-ratih [ busy in self ] Eva [ certainly ] Syat [ stays, remains ] Atma-triptah [ satiated  ] Cha [ and ] Manvah [ human ];
>
> Aatmni [ In herself ] Eva [ only ] Santushtah [ satisfied ] Tasya [ for her ] Karyam [ work,, duty ] Na [ does not ] Vidyte [ exists ] .
>
> But one who is busy in herself and stays satiated ; satisfied in herself building the necessary skills, for her there is no feeling of duty . 

Having attained such a state of tranquility,  we need to develop the skills based on the conditions and physical reality that by accident or design, universe has put us in. This sweet accident is our field of actions. Hence the true appreciation of our physical reality for the keys to identifying with `Bramha` lie in this little box. 

With this as a back drop , now we can resolve the plot of Gita and even the entire epic of `Mahabharta`. Arjuna is an example of dedication and focus. He has developed the best of skills based on his true physical reality - being a prince, his role is to fight the evil. He must take on the exploiters even if they are part of his own extended family or a network of friends. At the opportune moment, where universal responsibility is calling on him, he is faltering, duality struck ; thus Krishna is there with him to show him the righteous path. 

You may say , where is my Krishna to hold my hands , to wake me up at 5 am in a winter morning :-) He is right there, with you , inside you, as your own copy of protected, immutable and encrypted knowledge - your own `Atma`. 




# How I got here..

A part of you wants to share, win, succeed, gain and what not . Other part wants to be at peace, content or may be even lost .. why?  What happens and how the journey looks like?  And most importantly, who wins?  These questions have intrigued me for decades but they are getting very troublesome in last four five years. Here is a gist of my discoveries on this quest ..


### First clue from `SMB Gita`

`Krishna` tells `Arjuna` that I will share the secrets with you coz you have `Anuraga` in your heart. That means `Anuraga` is a pre-requisite for the communication. The person who holds the key to all your locks, your navigator, needs you to have something in your heart even to start the conversation. The obvious question than was `what is Anuraga?` . Unfortunately `Krishna` is silent on this in `Gita` or I couldn't find it yet.

Nevertheless, my search, led me to another aspect of Krishna that is solely focused on defining and elaborating `Anuraga`.

### Second Clue from epic `Radha Krishna`

Turns out `Anuraga` is just the first step of a broader concept `Prema`. In the story of `Radha Krishn`, `Krishna` teaches `Prema` to Radha. `Prema` is many times confused with **Love**.  I don't want to use the word, coz "Love", based on situations and cultures, has many meanings to it. Why don't we just stick with `Prema` for now and build a new concept..

### Longing - An eternal pull

The first aspect of `Prema` is intense **longing** ... to meet. To see and to listen. Longing begins with `Anuraga` and culminates into a deep inwards pull. In a way, this is understandable as the **gravity** . You can feel it but you can't really hold it or see it or even visualize. People explain gravity through space-time four dimensional models. But the truth is, its beyond our senses. There is an unknown pull. It just exists as part of our fabric, our being. Everything, everyone feels it. Its a pull towards the core. To a more comfortable lower orbit. Your longing may appear different from mine. That is coz you are a different system. Just like on earth we feel being pulled towards the center of the earth while at moon we feel same towards the center of the moon. Though everything is connected in a broader scheme, yet there are local configurations that may overpower the effect of global system(s). Though longing is universal, you may choose to ignore it. For example, in physical terms, we are here on earth, always feeling the gravitational pull, but we don't care about it. We don't discuss it. It's not in our focus.  However, for `Prema` to shape up, one needs to have a constant vigil of her longing. The appreciation of its beauty is `Anuraga`. The realization and a focus on your longing is the first step of `Prema`

One of the key characteristic of longing is there is absence of greed. Means, you are not chasing an outcome, or money or recognition. Its something, you would happily spend time on; invest all your resources and still feel blessed even if there is no return. This is different from worldly desires that always come with expectations. You just want to lose yourself in your longing.

It's immaterial if the longing is for `Krishna` or the `Soul`. If you long for a specific thing or a specific person, the journey to the door has already begun. In fact your longing is pre-decided based on the local sub-system you are in. You just can't long for any thing else. And it doesn't really matter. The idea that you must long for God (or your Soul) is something that has been popularized by the religious dogma. May be it was easier to explain to the people by using an arbitrary concept or there were other reservations to abstain truth or people didn't have the tools to explain or whatever. You can not long for God if God is not the one pulling you towards him. If it does, probably you are in God's subsystem. Or God (whatever it means) could be the center of global system. I am not too sure. What appears to me is  plain and simple. There exists something that always is in your dreams. You may not have realized the existence of this pull yet but it is there and its certain eventually you will know.

### The three fundamental bugs

The second aspect of `Prema` is to actively seek exclusion of three fundamental bugs - Fear, Anger and Jealousy. Everyone feels longing . Its universal. But very few are liberated from the three bugs Or even try to overcome these. Most of the epic stories, are the tales of Fear, Anger or Jealousy. In `Radha Krishna` too, `Krishna` helps `Radha` navigate, experience and overcome these three bugs experientially; commonly known as `Ras Leela`.

As said earlier, it doesn't really matter what you are longing for. What determines your success (beyond the door) is how you negotiate the obstacles on the path to become one with your core calling. The path is not easy and it is experiential. The actions you take on this path are called `Karma`. `Karma` that is done under influence of the three bugs are the cause of the `Bondage`(or Manifestation ..cuz Manifestation is nothing but bondage). The actions that are done to eradicate the three bugs are called `Nishkam Karma`(actions that dilute the manifestation). Rest everything is waste of time. Gita calls it `vyartha cheshta` ..the wasted effort.

### Two paths leading to the same door.

The path of `Prema`, also known as `Bhakti Yoga`, is the preferred path to self discovery. The other path being the `Gyaan Yoga` which ultimately leads to the same door. Only the beginning is different. `Prema` begins with intense longing where as `Gyaan Yoga` begins with extreme quest for knowledge. They both ultimately bring you to the same door. The door for inwards journey. Self discovery. The journey in itself is called `Nishkam Marga`. As in story of `Radha Krishna`, this journey is experiential. Which means, if you fear climbing the heights, you got to overcome your fear by standing on the rooftop. Same with your anger and jealously. You can't just read the book and feel free.


>> It might sound counter intuitive to say your longing can be any thing. Let's do a little a thought experiment. Lets say you are in such a subsystem that you long to consume alcohol. How can fulfilling your addiction be a good thing? Now imagine you drink making sure you are free from three bugs. That is you have no fear of losing your drink. Means, you are happy to give it up to someone more thirsty. You have no anger if you don't get your evening fix and you don't envy people with a basement full of wine cellars. What do you think? Are you not a righteous person? Are you any less than a devotee of Gods? Bottom line - its not important what you long for. The important thing is how you approach it. Even more important is acceptance and clear visual of your longing at all times coz that is the guiding force that keeps your feet glued to your path.


A word on desires - Its easy to confuse desires with longing. Desires are random. They come and go. Today its finding a new job. Tomorrow its promotion and then a career. Likewise a new car. A new smart phone while older one is working fine. Shoes, clothes, homes, gardens ... you name it. There are thousands of them and one more. They are temporary and transient.  You may buy a new car but there is no guarantee of elation. Your expectations can change in a blink of an eye. For example you chose a Red Tesla. And as soon as you took to the driving seat and greener one passed by. Now you are repenting the choice of color. It actually happened to me with my silver Prius. I still wish I had gone for Silver Gray. Longing is beyond elation. Its something you want to lose in. Imagine the world as a large roulette table. You bet your time (only currency)for a simple doze of elation. The ball can slot into any number. You may win a jackpot or lose or just retain your hand. There is no `Karma` here. You act in line with a temporary chase. You build things driven by random drives. Quick and dirty. And you hope for good luck. All chance and over a longer run, you have a fair share of wins and losses, but time is something you always lose. This is what `Gita` calls out loud as `Vyartha Cheshta`.. the wasted effort. Most people waste their time this way,  gambling their time, without even realizing their longing. Just as we go around the earth without knowing the gravity. We continue to pass our days without even realizing what is holding us on ground. And constantly pulling us in.

### Longing vs material success..

Material success is NOT fulfillment of desires. Material success is building or creating an artifact of lasting value. Something that drives a community of admirers. `Karma` for the followers of path `Nishkam Marg` are the actions that you take to overcome the three bugs. Imagine you have intense longing for someone or something and you are not supposed to feel fear of loss, anger for not getting what you want or jealousy if they are  with others. This is the ultimate fight, the final battle. In a way, it is giving up perception of yourself in favor of meeting with your core. The self perception is nothing but the make up and rise of Bondage. Strengthening the perception of self is **material success** (not to be confused with random fulfillment of desires).  In that, success is opposite of longing. Longing is what pulls you towards your core, one orbit at a time. Success is what pushes you out into a greater and bigger self, one orbit at a time. As such longing is deflationary. Success is inflationary. Thus even for material success, you need core purpose. In pursuit of your purpose, when you act influenced by the bugs aka passion, you get material success. If you act free from bugs, you get everlasting peace and realization of your longing.

However, you have help on this path coz the object of your longing will guide you at every step. Correct your course. On the other hand, `Gyaan Yogi` will be quite lost once he opens the door. He will need to develop the longing. There is greater probability that he will be lost in outwardly success. Mostly in the shape of recognition of work or an organic build up of a community (of admirers) around. A `Nishkam Yogi` singularly focuses on his longing. He consciously practices `Karma` to stay away from three bugs. A daily ritual of understanding your longing and practicing set of activities to keep you away from the bugs or enable your mental immune system to fight them is called `Yajna`. In a way `Yajna` is the meditative force to cleanse yourself from the bugs. You repeatedly go over your fears, jealousy and anger and sublimate them into your longing. Also known as `Aahuti`.

###  How long? Does the suffering ever ends ...

Krishna tells `Radha`, you already have longing for me and I for you. I have you always with me coz by divine design I don't attach to these bugs. The moment, you overcome these, I am already in you, with you. Its obviously not possible for us mortals to reach the destination in one shot. There are going to be multiple iteration where bugs take over our minds. The suffering, however, will start receding as soon as we understand the framework and make a concious choice to put on a fight. At least we will stop manifesting more bondage. That in itself is a big take away.

>>In other words, the physical manifestation of obstacles between you and what you want is the 'bondage to self ' on account of three bugs. Appreciation of self is a two body problem. Means, you must have someone else in order for you to realize, replenish and strengthen your self. To see others and compare yourself with them, you need to be outwardly focused. This means outwards vision, leads to comparison and forces you to chase success. Success comes through artifacts created in pain - songs , books , music - all are expressions of suffering of pleasure. As soon as you start looking inwards, you lose the sense of self because there is nothing else to compare. You now think of your longing and find peace in yourself. This is where there is no influence of bugs. You are above fear , anger and jealousy. Such state is state of bliss. People sometime mistake this state with the word "passion". Passion is when you are creating an artifact to prove something. Passion leads to success. The inward looking state of bliss is not passion. Gita describes this state as `Udaseen` means someone who is not interested in success. Someone lost in herself.


# Back to the story

So what makes you inward looking?

When you long without bugs you are going inwards, to lower orbits. A more and more peaceful state. When your longing is tarnished with bugs and you don't  develop tools to actively conquer them you create (and share) real artifacts. These could be poems, paintings or inventions of lasting value. In other words, you accomplish success. A community crops up around you. You become center of a new concious sub-system but you can never be at peace coz the new system you create is not the one you belong to even though its built by you. `Gita` says that a `Yogi` must not give in to the community even out of benevolence for this will soon lead to random desires and matrix will engulf you in no time. A `Gyan Yogi` has more to fear here than someone on the path of `Prema`. A tree that bears fruits too soon, never grows tall for the people and birds flock around disturbing your inwards journey . `Gita` thus says that `Yogi` should keep his journey hidden even from friends and family. Only your `guru` (if you have one) should know your accomplishments. This is inwards journey. You know your longing. You fight the bugs on daily basis through a well thought out plan. You know you can change the world with your work but you wait quietly, till you are one with the your longing.


>> When you start looking inwards. You don't want recognition for your work. You don't want community around you . Money is the last thing you look for. For you don't need worldly things coz they don't really enable you to meet your calling. They are just obstacles killing your time. This should, however, not mean that you are less exuberant. The shades of pain are momentary coz you know the truth. And you have already hit upon or working on what you need to do. You will find yourself giving up your addiction. With each small win over your fear you will blossom a new spirit in you. You will know how to shut the door on your jealousy. And you will be ever free from anger. You will bless even those who didn't do right by you for you know that anger hearts you more than anyone else. And lastly, you will win your fears. Things will be easy for you. Your presence will solve the problems. People will cherish your quiet company. Your peace will be everlasting and so will be your joy.

### What if I relapse?

On the path of `Prema`, longing breeds true knowledge. Knowledge, however is not a guarantee of success for the journey is experiential. Thats the reason journey doesn't even start without longing coz bugs start acting only when you start acting on your longing. And thats the reason there are pitfalls. Almost every minute of the day - Anger, fear and jealousy alter your mind. Show you infinite possibilities of doubt. Being steadfast on `Prema` is the key. It needs to be your way of life. The good news is the work done on this path, never goes wasted or perishes. Even if you lose your way, you can always come back and start exactly where you left.

# Knowledge

The world we perceive - see and feel is just a three dimensional interface to placate our senses. The scripture calls it `Maya`. The movie called it `Matrix`and now thanks to research by likes of Don Hoffman and Prakash Chandra there is a solid case against our perceived reality. Both scripture and science point to what is already known to the practitioners of `Prema` and that is we are concious agents in a vast field of conciousness.

### The 3D interface

The idea of an interface is to limit the choices. If you are in the program, you can change anything. If you are on command line, you can use the program with very many options. The 2D graphical user interface further limits your choices. Touch and voice interfaces make it almost a straight line experience. Imagine how many more restrictions a developer needs to put in to create a 3D interface that we live in. Any improvement in experience comes with increasing limit on the choices. Success is building new layers of experience. Longing or the inwards journey is removing these layers.

Thus longing can also be thought as something for which there is no choice in material world. Almost impossible to get coz the choice exists at a lower level of experience. Which will force you to let go the current interface and explore a lower layer. You may get an option immediately or you may be forced to go to a further lower level. And there is no end but that is not important coz the goal is not to reach the longing, the goal is to conquer the bugs. As soon as you get rid of them, you are set free. Free is beyond manifestation thus the end of longing. If you keep on digging the interfaces, you will continue to fight the bugs. The proceeds will be beautiful jewels and you will be required to keep them secret. That is the source of consistent pain. The moment you make your artifacts public, you will create a new interface. A better understanding of the world is in fact a new interface. Einstein created a new view of the world.

The things that you can get in current interface are desires. Some are easy , others are hard . The outcomes are random. Thus an equal distribution of elation and sorrow. After a brief moment of turmoil, you may move on to the next desire without ever getting a chance to see and conquer the bugs. What you waste in the process is physical time.  If you fight and conquer the bugs by going a layer deeper, desires of current interface become quite meaningless. Thus journey inwards is righteous.  Even if you are unable to conquer, you will create artifacts of real success.  You may not get peace but you are assured that experience you thus gain is not perishable. Thus time invested on this path is never wasted.

### Plausible definition of God

Longing of every one pursuing the path may be different but the actions are pretty much same. That is to eradicate the bugs. Thus we can say the every one has one same goal. The journey , more or less, looks the same. This means someone can create a broad action plan without looking at the object of longing. Kinda a software project template. You may be implementing a web project for e-commerce, or writing a real time maps app, you can always use a preexisting framework with little tweaks. So the framework provisions a broad guideline to get what you want. In this context the framework is kinda God. It gives common ways or working, a set of vocabulary. Over a period of time, following the framework becomes more important coz you know if you followed the rules you will accelerate your journey to destination. I fear when it becomes sacred but for most people it might serve the purpose. Well ..lets just call it God if that helps.

### The duality

Old adage - it takes two to tango. Knowledge must manifest to experience. And it must resolve the experience to set itself free. The knowledge is called `Pusrusha` (not to confuse with male). The experience is called `Prakriti` or the `Maya` or the matrix. The matrix comes with set of tools - fear, anger and jealousy to preserve the knowledge into a 3d shape so that the shape could experience the interface. The experience is always source of pain coz it severely limits the choices. It feels like a jail.At some point you want to set yourself free again. You search for the path. That is the eternal quest. The other way being deep longing for something that matrix doesn't expressly provides an option for. Both lead to same door. That is how to handle the fabric of nature. You can't just wish it away. Thus you must act to eradicate the bugs - the tools of nature. That is - you must engage in `Karma`.

###  The state of consistent bliss.

The state when you understand the bugs and well equipped with tools to play with nature is the state of peace. It brings exuberance coz now you can play on the waves. You can surf the way you want. You have matrix for you to play without ever indulging in fear, anger or jealousy. `Yogi` lives for this. Such a `Yogi` is also called `Sthitprgya`- one whose knowledge and nature is stable. One who can surf on the waves. The fun of being is this. Its not in being totally lost in matrix and is neither in being totally free. You must play the game but not for win or loss. You play the game coz its meant to be played. This is `Ras Leela` and this is eternal joy. It automatically lends you exuberace. It allows you to engage without indulging. It is being in Matrix but always at a safe distance. You are able to see both and you are able to see the whole play. Such a vision is called `Atmoupamyen Drishti`.

###  The "why" - and the `Faith`

Its naive to ask for the complete understanding of the design coz inflationary mind always have a why after every answer. If you are expanding in unknown, you will always have curiosity to know what next and expansion can be quite endless. For someone who is peeling his own layers (expanding inwards), the next is always already known. There is no question to be asked.  On this path, actions to reach your longing is more important than knowing the reason of your longing. This attitude of trust is called `Faith`. Not to be confused with religious faith.

### Focus on the goal

Getting to a lower obit (journey or expansion inwards) is essentially peeling off a layer of unnecessary sophistication. We are used to graphical user interface. Getting to a command line interface is one action (Karma) of renunciation. Arguably, a command line expert is more knowledgable than a GUI users. Thus renunciation is not reductive. Its in fact expansion inwards. Yes, there are infinitely many layers. But the goal is NOT to un-peel everything either. The moment journey begins and you reach a freedom from three bugs, the peace is yours. You don't need answers. You are looking for eternal peace, joy, bliss or whatever you want to call it. In fact, having no quest is the very definition of peace. This is one reason `Gita` prefers `Prem Yoga` over `Gyaan Yoga`. A `Gyaan Yogi` needs to unlearn many ways of his working.

### Consciousness Field
We don't need any instrument to see conciousness field. There are patterns in our on three dimensional world. If you see any network, the branches of trees, neurons structure in brain, the arteries, social media graph .. you already know how the information flows. When complexity increases, there is a need to preserve or to back up, thats when a branch breaks off (or a fruit shows up), to preserve the entire knowledge base or to start a new network. The new network is exactly same as the parent but over time with interaction with environment (random desires), it takes on slight changes. The environment is nothing but the roulette table. The tree shaped network that we perceive is just a 3d representation of conciousness field by our senses. The actual field is the lines of longing. Effectively  you carry the same purpose as your parent knowledge network. Connection is in the symmetry. And it grows more granular as we travel back. Family, to race to mankind to living beings to just one single molecule of origin. But again the knowledge and "why" of the design is unimportant. Knowledge of existence is more important and how to work for the purpose.

###  Who am I?

Manifestation is nothing but preserving something. Preserving requires a physically bound space ( a limitation of our 3D interface observed by sense organs) . Based on your subnetwork, you can be anything - a leaf of the tree, a branch or a fruit / seed. A branch is a complete codebase and its purpose is to add a feature - could be a leaf or it can split into more branches. A seed is a backup or a fork to start a new network.

Your purpose is to act in accordance with the subsystem also called `swabhava` and three bugs are there to provide you a physical shape in our 3D world. You wouldn't survive as a separate entity, or in other words - Knowledge will be lost (get unpreserved) if you lose the physical shape. To that extent - anger, fear and jealousy are important to manifest you. But whats the point of physical manifestation if you lost eye on the core calling?

In a way knowing yourself is the common denominator. You could be a seed or a branch or a leaf - you need to know what you are before you take on any additional mission. And that's exactly is the journey inwards. You start with either a quest bugging you with questions of your origin, or you are aware of and have intense longing. Both paths will lead to same gate. The journey henceforth will be remove your focus from the bugs and shift it to yourself. At the same time you need to live to keep the knowledge preserved. Thus you need to indulge in these bugs at your will. That's exactly what `Krishna` teaches us. His indulgence with `Radha` takes him into all the bugs but he stays there detached. Sustaining everlasting peace and always involved in his longing such that `Radha` is only an imaginary construct for him.

### Cost of the system
The matrix is created to reduce the effort it takes to preserve the backups or new projects. We call it system or organizations. In physical world, it could be family, city, country. The systems are inefficient by design coz they are supposed to support multiple variants of the same project and many time many different projects. The system is never free. It needs resources to maintain itself. Thus the random goodies. Casino can only run if you play a hand. Can you (the knowledge base that you contain) live without the system. Yes you can. And in fact that's the best way to minimize the distractions. Performing chores yourself is thus important. Even if you can't fully give up the system, you can attempt to minimise your plays.

### Notion of Time
Time in physical world depends on what orbit (or layer of sophistication) you are. Farther you are from core, the faster time will pass. System will demand more of your time. We think automation reduces our work but the fact is we are working harder than our parents and they worked harder than theirs. When you are at the core of your subsystem, the slows down. Now it moves at the distance your subsystem is away from its core. Finally at the super center, the time stops. There nothing to traverse anymore.

### Communication

We are already connected with variants of our knowledge systems coz we have knowledge base and same longing. Information automatically travels from us to our sister replicas. And than upwards. That's the reason no other species need internet. The external communication tools we humans create interfere with our internal system. That's the reason we feel disconnected, alone and depressed.



...WIP...
