# Intelligence

In the previous chapters we learnt that `Yajna` is the process to repeat the actions such that we can improve the efficiency of practice. We reorganize the actions, we iterate over what is the best way to perform a routine. In a way we are creating a network of threads to hold the knowledge such that it starts making sense to us. The process is iterative. The thing that drives this reconfiguration of the apparatus is called `Budhi` - The intelligence. 

Let us go back to the jigsaw puzzle to make it little more clear. Every iteration on the puzzle is nothing but review what you have already built, then see the ports that are available to add the pieces and then try out different pieces to fit in to say one single port. In the beginning, you may need to try every single piece out there to fit into that one single port but soon you realize that you are looking for part of the picture. If the piece is building the nose, you can quickly discard all other body parts. You simply try the pieces that kinda look like the nose. Gradually you become more and more "INTELLIGENT". In a way practice drives your intelligence and intelligence drives your practice. The picture you are thus creating is a manifestation. The knowledge - unique to you, is the skill you have gathered to quickly choose the piece. And Intelligence is ability you have garnered to do it quickly.

You might have seen people solving a Rubik's cube in matter of seconds. Pre-requisite to solving a Rubik's cube or the jigsaw puzzle is your `Mana` needs to be stable. You can't afford distractions. Once `Mana` is stable, `Chitta` - the faculty of conscious agent that drives intelligence - starts it's play. In fact "Seeking"  instigates you to get into `Yajna` in the first place. It tracks the manifestations block chain to ascertain what is the best thing  to emulate for you that you can put your flavor on - may be with a different color or an improvement as your manifestation. It is what awakens you stop indulging in wasted effort `Vyatha Cheshta`. 

## Automation
Thus `Yajna` is a process to create a consumable (for self and others) configuration that can hold the decrypted knowledge. When we run ritual what comes out is the code for  manifestation [we will talk about the visualization in next chapter] . Intelligence is our ability to build better and better configurations to hold more and more complex decrypted knowledge as quickly as possible. The goal is to make it seem like effort less. The song that Elvis sings, the cube that you solved in less than 30 seconds. In a way "Intelligence" leads to automation. 


> If `Yajna` is some sort of furnace - you burn `Budhi` to decrypt the knowledge into a manifestation. And then make it repeatable, and Automated. 


## Knowledge lies in History - Intelligence is the version tracker. 

If you think of `Yajna` as a git repository that tracks all the changes you are making ( to code and configuration) , the change log carries the history as to what changes were needed from say initiation of your Half marathon Journey, to a successful one. In essence it is the version or commit history  (along with rationale as to why you made those changes) is the "Knowledge".  Think of each commit as a practice session of `Yajna` wherein you ran the code and made a small change.  The Readme.md with  the final updated branch is the "Information". There is no way to completely document the rationale for each commit, even if you do that , reading and understanding it would be more taxing than building your own new fork to improve an aspect or do something as an add on. 

If you think of `Yajna` as a brain plasticity exercise. Then knowledge is why every new synapse formed(version history). Information is the final version synapse network to perform a specific routine. From a neural networks standpoint, knowledge is how network works. Information is the prediction of the network. 

More broadly speaking Knowledge is manufacturing, Information is sales and marketing :-)

## `Chintan`

What is knowledge to `Karmyoga`, intelligence is to `Chintan`. It is the process to use intelligence (with stable curiosity- seeking) to decide the scope, structure and shape of manifestation of your `Yajna`. It is to break down your practice sessions into digestible modules and then review them to implement improvements. 

Thus `Manan and Chintan` are the essential parts of `Yajna`. 

## Karmic Cycle inside a Yajna 

Long before you get ready for `Yajna` , your curiosity scans all the manifestations. It consumes information for pleasure and survival. In fact survival itself is pleasure. Fickle curiosity stays consumed in sensory pleasures . It goes through cycles of pleasures and pains till the you resolve that pain is far greater probability than happiness. Then you invoke your "Intelligence" to initiate your `Yajna` and seek knowledge - to embrace everlasting peace. 

### Dhyana - Manan

At this stage `Mana`  takes over the senses and seeks the manifestations that can inspire it to get into `Yajna`. Its own manifestation. The scanning process of this consumption is called `Manan` - Basically you are curiously seeking  the best template to initiate your action - Is it Music , is it coding , or can you do something that no one has done before ? 

### Actions routine 

Once you see the template that excites you - you start tracking  information. From a single git repo or from multiple. You start some action but soon you realize that you need a better design. Nothing works the way you had envisaged. Knowledge lacks. 

### Dhyana - Chintan 

You use your intelligence to plan a change - in code , in configuration , the way you are singing , the way you are hitting  the ball .. This review of failure of last run and effort to increase success in the next is again consumption of information. This new information will change the mesh. You are now ready to run again till you decipher the first block of knowledge. A nice fit - tight and snug. But this new piece of knowledge can change the previous structure. It can alter the entire plan. 

The cycle continues till your intelligence has created just the right synapses in the brain ..Or made a new commit in your code such that many pieces of knowledge have come together to form a stable mesh. A module has formed. New pieces of knowledge , again have the potential to throw everything under the bus. That is the reason , `Yajna` is iterative. 


`Dhyana` is part of `Yajna`. Gradually the `Manan` keeps reducing. Actions get better and better automated . `Chintan` becomes more and more elaborate. So much so that the damn thing doesn't fit in your brain anymore .. You wish you never started writing the book. A small post is so much better covering a smaller experiment. Why take up the  scope of book. Book anyway is because a long post couldn't fit everything that you want to say. In fact long post happened because each paragraph must have a unique piece of your knowledge but you needed to say lot more. You wanted to build a  better design for others to fill in their knowledge as well.

> At some point `Chintan` becomes too taxing for intelligence. You are spending more time in design than in the coding itself. Yajna stalls. At this point Intelligence splits the mesh - It could be a new para in a long post or a new chapter in the book. 

Intelligence wants to make sure it creates the best possible structure for knowledge to fill in. Better the structure - better automated is the skill. 

# Intelligence and `Nishkaam Yajna` 

It might sound reasonable to imagine that if you are striving for `Nishkam Yajna - No focus on outcomes`; then you probably don't need intelligence. Nothing can be farther from the truth . Chintan and `Nishkam Yajna`  go hand in hand. Both are complimentary NOT competitors. Krishna spells this very eloquently defining the different stages of intelligence - `Budhi`

## lack of Intelligence 

Krishna says, when we are under the influence of sensory consumption with the fickle mind `Chanchal Mana` calling the shots ; we have no intelligence. Such a being is called `Budhiheena`. 

## Rise of Intelligence 

As you start understanding the difference between peace and pleasures and are able to compute that pains have far greater probability, you first indulge in `Sakaam Yajna` - Ritual of actions targeted to a specific outcome. Such intelligence is called `Vyvsayatmika Budhi`. This is Is a stage where your you want to avail peace but you are opportunist. You compute the cost benefit. 

## Stable Intelligence 

Finally , you reach a stage where action and peace is all that matters. You are beyond the cycles of happiness and pains. Every aspect of your life is a `Yajna` done for the sake of actions. Such a person is called `Sthit Prajna` - means whose intelligence is stable. 

# Trance  `Samadhi`


What if you don't want any manifestation. You can shut off all your senses. Start observing the consistent rhythmic actions your [protected] knowledge is driving - eg breathing, heart pumping . You are just observing. Not practicing. Or you are practicing only observation. It might appear to an untrained eye that such a state is total lack of actions - ie no peace , but when such actions are taken up by a `Sthit Prajna` - person with stable `Mana` and stable `Chitta` , such an act is a timeless nothingness. This is a state of consummated rest where happiness , pain and even peace is secondary. It is called `samadhi`. It is cycles of `Manan` and `Chintan` without any actions. A play of stable seeking and stable intelligence. In a way, actions - through everlasting peace on account of knowledge - help your intelligence and curiosity to get stable. A point comes when both are so balanced that you don't need actions any more.

Thus `Samadhi` is the final or near final stage of `Karm Yoga`. 

# Back to Gita 

Continuing the conversation from last section - 

Krishna had said that Senses can be controlled with `Mana` , `Mana` can be put on a path with `Budhi`. How then we control the intelligence ? Asked Arjuna 

Krishna said - Only knowledge (Atma) controls the intelligence. 

Let us see how knowledge and intelligence interplay .  


