As we saw in the last section , `Gunas` define our mood. Let us now see the effect of these moods on the `Yajna` and thus manifestations thereof. 

I think it is clear from the last section that a person who is primarily driven by `Tamasa` can hardly take on `Yajna`. Such people consume themselves all sorts of information (manifestations) and bloat their way to sleep. People driven by the `Rajas Guna` mostly engage in `Sakaam Yajna` - actions performed to gain a favorable outcome. As we saw before, their intelligence is mostly consumed in cost benefit analysis. They fight the fickle mind and are normally consumed in worries. They work very hard but their work leads to manifestations of inferior value that lack large blocks of knowledge. As regards to outcomes, we know they are random based on degree of separation from the actions. 


# Real Wealth  - `Daivy Sampad`

Gita says that a `Sthit Prajna` - one whose curiosity and intelligence is stable , is able to engage in `Nishkam Yajna` - A ritual of actions where focus is on quality of righteous actions rather than the outcomes. Such people slowly gain what Gita calls `Daivy Sampad`. With their minds stable and their ability to take righteous actions, such people decrypt large chunks of knowledge. While gaining immense peace through such actions , `Nishkaam Karm Yogi` attains worldly riches. 

## A word of caution for the `Nishkam Karm Yogies`

As the `Daivy Sampad` grows, people grow a community around you . Such followers aid the `Yajna`. At the same time , such communities become a matter of deep pride for the `Karm Yogies`. This is another way `Maya` - Matrix plays the last trick. If the Yogi's ego starts feasting on such recognition, her fall is imminent. 

## Daivy Sampad to Master of the consciousness field

The decryption of knowledge has exponential characteristics. Once the `Karm Yogi` passes a certain threshold, they experience explosion of knowledge. At this stage the intelligence falls apart. The expansion of knowledge is such that there is no intelligence to capture contain it into manifestations. Such an intricate play of knowledge is no more regular `Prakriti Purusha` interaction. This exchange is called `Siva Shakti` where `Siva` represents intense knowledge and `Shakti` symbolizes extreme intelligence.

Krishna says , if the `Karm Yogi` stays steadfast on her  path , she becomes the Master of the field through above exponential expansion of knowledge . Such a Yogi is called - `Khshetrajya`. He says that the five bugs that capture senses along with curiosity , intelligence and ego is what creates the consciousness field - `Kshetra`. One who understands and conquers the five bugs to stabilize their curiosity and intelligence is the "Master of the field".


We have dealt with the five bugs , knowledge and intelligence thus far in the preceding sections ... Let us now look at the "ego" and formation of conciousness in the next .. 
