<center><h1> Chapter 7.0</h1></center>

One of the few things that both religion and science agree on is - "Change is the only permanent thing". This, however, gives an impression that change is linear and irreversible. But if you see all around us,  change is not linear. It is always circular. Look at the seasons. Winter feels like it will never end but then Summer comes in. And just when the heat wave reaches the peak, we know the cold face of earth has started taking the shape. Same is true about the happiness and pains. Friends and family. Relationships. The change is mostly circular. Yes , there may be subtle changes in terms of places , people or patterns but by and large, things repeat themselves enough times for us to see a wave like pattern. 

The question is "do we have something  that is not changing ?". This is a doubt worth entertaining. Isn't it ? Because if there is something immutable, it might be a good idea to make that as our basis. It makes sense to stick to that center around which all this is rotating in a circular-ish move. Is there a fulcrum, a pivot or an axis around which this entire visible or perceptible universe is dancing ? We know from our experience that we can only observe the change. For example we can only see if there is a change in the color. If everything had the same color as the backdrop, there is nothing  to see. Our touch senses only if there is a change in the texture. In essence, our senses are designed to observe only "change". No wonder what we perceive is always changing because that is what we are looking for. 

This might sound a circular argument but the very definition of change is hinged on the fact that there must be something fixed. Or at least relatively stable frame of reference. And this is not an alien science. We see many things around us that are relatively stable. In fact we fancy stable technologies. We seek stable friends. Earth is good because gravitational pull is quite stable. Imagine if gravity changed the way weathers do. Half the weight in summer when you want a beach body and double the size in winter when you can safely tuck the belly in an oversize coat :-) 

Gita's take on this is in line with the above argument. It says there are two fundamental parts .. 

- One that changes - `Kshr` - All of manifested universe is part of this. This is what we can perceive with our senses. 
- Other that never change - `Akshr` - The `Atma` [protected] knowledge is immutable. The good news is this what we are. Even though we can't play around with this part through our senses, it is still accessible to us and drives most of our actions.

The question still remains why change occurs in the manifested. To understand it , let us first see what exactly is manifested and how we perceive it .. 

## Ever changing manifestations. 

Manifestation is the expansion of information. Information, by definition means something that can be informed. In other words it is something that can be experienced through senses. Everything that we can observe directly with our senses (or by enhancing our perception through tools) is essentially "information". As we saw in last section, information is `Shruti ` - something that can be heard ! Now of course we can read it or watch a video or even see face to face. A house is information. Clothes are information and so is a book. Everything is a `Shruti`. The Hindu scripture names few `shrutis` as the messages from kings and from the saints - Those were passed on a hearsay but broader definition is something that we can experience with the senses. 

On the other hand, knowledge is something that can only be experienced - it is beyond senses. It is beyond communication. Ask someone who creates a poem, sings a song or makes an airplane. An airplane is a manifestation. We can see it. But how it is created is so unique to the engineers who make it. You can't make a plane or music just by seeing a plane or a concert. You can't even make a car just by reading a book on the automotive engineering. Ask Elon Musk about the manufacturing hell :-) . You need to engage in the action `Karma`. Practicing `Karma` as a ritual `Yajna` leads to the knowledge that eventually translates into the manifestation. Once something manifests - a meme, a joke , a rocket , a book or a poem - It becomes a `Shruti`. It has it's own expression.  But the knowledge remains with the one who performed the `Yajna` as her `Smriti`. In a way every manifestation presents an opportunity to know something deeper. It tells us that someone has spent umpteen days and months in creating this and we can also achieve that skill through rigor or practice. 

In a way the knowledge is like a little black hole in you. Even you can't see it with your senses. You really don't know how you hit the baseball so perfectly while others can't even connect. You have sure done ton of practice but what is in you to hit that ball is beyond you. Every one is, however, informed well when you hit the home run. That is a manifestation of home run. You can make it an NFT if you want :-)

At the same time you do want to tell them all about this thing. Words alone don't help - why not just sing that song. Why not fly a drone - The knowledge drives the urge to share. How you package the information to share is up to you. May be you are a master of words , or you are an engineer - the way you share is what you manifest - that other conscious agents could touch and feel. What you can't share is the knowledge. Your `smriti` dawns on you through `yajna` but stays with you. 

With every new iteration, you improve your manifestation a tiny bit. That is how older code gets more stable. More bugs are fixed. It now runs on more platforms. If you are reading this book , I am sure there are typos. Probably some of the topics don't make sense; but the 20th edition of this book will be impeccable if I continue to refine it. You see the point - the change is because we are always improving the things. Even if I don't improve this text, I am sure there are many others who are writing on this topic. Some of them will sure take it as a life mission. If you want to read a book or use an app , you would always seek for the latest version. No one ever asks for the alphas or betas. But the improvements are always better information. The 100th edition of Organic Chemistry is not something that can teach you chem without ever going to lab. May be there are better graphics, an online tutorial but you still need to solve those problems yourself in order to appreciate binomial theorem. 

Now, certain manifestations are only for the consumption. These manifestations change even faster. Because the whole purpose is to make you invest your time without any good reason. That is the reason most of the things on Netflix are so addictive . Game of Thrones invests more only on the back ground music than the entire budget of CS curricula. Which means that the fast changing artifacts or technologies are generally traps for your time. Anyway, we digressed - the point I am making is , manifestations are always changing to make them more palatable and we always intend to enjoy the latest version. That is why there are always new leaves. Newer versions of the same app. New shows. New stars - both in the tinsel town and in the night sky that you saw twenty years back to write your poem. 


## The interface

You are probably reading this text on a beautiful user interface of your smart device. Some of you, who still lug around a bulky laptop for work, may be reading it on the Windows UI. Windows 10 is pretty good though Microsoft recently announced an all new interface in Windows 11 :-) . If you are a creative type, you might be using a Mac to read this in your shiny Safari . And then there are few Linux geeks who still use a command line interface to do all things. Yes, there are text browsers that can somehow render a web page without a drop of Java Script :-) Bottom line is - you need an interface to read something as simple or as complex as a web page. The type and nature of the interface doesn't really matter. The question is what exactly is the interface ? 

> Interface is the mechanism through which our senses interact with the information (manifestations)

Let us expand this a little more. The moment we open our eyes , what we see is the interface. A glorious three dimensional interface. Our ears, skin , nose - the senses other than the eyes , don't need a three dimensional interface but the perceptions we get through these senses - even the perception of the taste , is through an interface. Really ? 

You may argue that ears don't need an interface. You can say that the sound can simply get into our ears and then into our brains. Yes, it can but how do we differentiate the barking sound of a dog from that of the cat purrs ? 

### The interface of doubts. 

Interface is NOT one that observes. Observations are done by the senses. Interface is where we make sense of the observations. If there was no auditory interface, the sounds or big bull dog and that of the tiny cat won't seem different to us. We wont be able to differentiate the taste of Napa red from that of Scotland fluids. We have a pre existing copy of the taste of coffee and that is what makes us distinguish it from the Darjeeling tea. You may recall the discussion on `Dhritis`. Our evaluation of observation v/s what we have as a reference point is lot more than a computer matching the cat pics because what we invoke is an enchilada of emotions. That is the reason some people might throw up at the sight of a someone killing an animal but the same person may not think twice eating the same animal at a fancy restaurant. 

In the last chapter, we understood that the "doubts" are our pre conceived notions that we check against reality through actions. Thus interface is a place where we match our "doubts" with the sensory inputs. You can look at a picture of Golden Gate Bridge and tell that it is different from the Brooklyn Bridge because you can match your eyes' three dimensional input with the pre existing picture in your brain. It is also a place where you make an assumption about the reality and take a call to test your presumption against reality. Interface works great with the active senses but they are not mandatory. For example we can have experiences in the dreams. Dreams feel quite real but in reality we want to make sure that we are not dreaming something. We want to continuously assess our reality and most of the time we run ahead of the actual event because we have expectations tied to most of our actions. For example, if you put a kettle on the stove, you know it is going to boil soon , you check if it is done or not. In our survival oriented world, we are continuously assessing the manifestations against our expectations. As discussed above, the information bout manifestations changes rather quickly these days. Thus we are mostly busy in assessing the change .. No wonder our reality is always changing. 

> Interface is NOT something external. It is with in us. That is the reason my perception of reality is different from you. And we both see the world in totally different light v/s a dog though the dog has almost same number of senses. 

### Interface is full of noise. 

After a day's hard work, you decided to open the bottle of that Napa red , the costly one and sat down on your couch to watch something good. You click past the never ending list of titles on Prime Videos, nothing really matches the mood. You shuffle between Prime to Netflix to Hulu to HBO , and then something gets your attention. You click to read the abstract and may be watch a trailer. Why ? 

Because you have a unique presumption of this evening. May be you want to watch some action but with a mix of meaningful emotional drama and something intelligent though not crossing over to sci fi. The "Dark Knight" sounds perfect but you have already seen it though you have almost forgotten the story line. May be new Joker but that one seems bit too much psycho -ish. Okay, the point is - you are choosing one or may be two or max three titles out of thousands of options available to you online. 

The things that you want to indulge in are the things that matter from interface standpoint. Rest everything is noise. Another example - Let  us say you are driving on the freeway. Thousands of cars and Trucks are moving by your side. All you care is not to hit any of them. You don't really care if it is a car or a truck or plane. If we ensure you that your Tesla will never hit anything on the road , would you even notice what is going on on the road ? All that is noise. Billions of people living their lives, never criss crossing you , trillions of stars in the outer galaxy, millions of apps in the app store and everything that is out there - they all help make you what you are , but from "interface" standpoint, they are just noise. Don't get me wrong , that occasional Lamborghini on the road might catch your attention to inspire you but you rarely notice the things in this vast expanse. Yet, here we are with all those tiny twinkling stars in the night sky. Oh well , they helped you write a poem some twenty years back :-)

### A puddle of information 
It doesn't matter if you are looking at this page through Android UI or iOS , or on Mac or in a text Browser. The interface in your mind can match the sensory inputs that came into your brain through a set of actions or the noticeable things in the noise, with the pre existing notions. This is where we create our beautiful (or mundane) reality. A three dimensional visual box , a deep auditory pipe and flattish sense of touch and taste. The remarkable thing of interface is our ability to verify pan senses. For example, we may hear a sound and we can perceive that it is a train coming from distance and when we open our eyes we do see a train at a distance. Not an aeroplane. All this is good. 

> But we know for sure that senses can only observe information. We can't communicate knowledge thus "knowledge" is beyond senses and thus "knowledge" is beyond this very intricate interface. 


## Life cycle of Manifestation

I guess a serialized list is the easiest way to communicate but the reader knows these things may occur out of order or might even overlap ..

- A desire takes birth  - `Icha`
- You take a vow to make it happen - `Sankalpa` - Starting of a `Kalpa`
    - You start the actions - Start of `Yajna`
    - Phase 1 - You gain tremendous knowledge. Every session is opening up new things - `Sattva`
    - Phase 2 - You have something already in you but you don't know how to communicate it. You are in constant struggle with in you if it should be revealed, if yes how ? Is album a right way or a single chart .  Or should I make it a concert ? Should I make it free or charge for it. Will others get advantage of my creation ? You spend a lot of time in this though you still continue to practice. The hopes are high. Ideas are good - Basically you spin on three legs. Enjoy/ decrypt the knowledge, figure out the shape of information , figure out the manufacturing process - `Treta`. 
    - Phase 3 - Knowledge is complete. Artifact is ready. Reveal the information or not - `Dwaper`
    - Phase 4 - Information is fully baked in , you automate the information dissemination - It could be home runs, a you tube video , millions of copies of the book you wrote, concerts - `Kali`.
- End of Actions - End of Yajna
- Desire is fulfilled - If the outcome was favorable - you are happy, otherwise it is a pain. 
- Information is consumed by the target conscious agents. It is stale , useless . A book on the shelf that you don't even care to dust. - End of `Kalpa`. 
- The knowledge is still in decrypted stage with you. You can see a many new possibilities that are hidden to others. You will need to gain more knowledge to realize those possibilities - hence a new desire. And start of next `Kalpa`
- And the cycle continues. 


You continue to decrypt the knowledge and manifest. Information keeps getting added till there are possibilities to decrypt the knowledge. You exit the game when the knowledge is fully decrypted - `Nirvana`. 

Information keeps on adding and keeps adding and getting stale. The stale information is all the unconscious universe we can observe but it is not current. These automated artifacts run our universe but we don't pay any attention. No one opens the refrigerator compressor to figure out how it cools as long as the damn thing works. All you care if the beers got chilled or not 


