In chapter of conciouness we understood the nature of consious agent. It has all the necessry scaffolding that is needed to pursue the knowledge and it has all the bugs to indulge with the matrix with senses developed to engage. The question arises how such a complex agent is formed. After all we are quite a complex machine. In the user interface we look like a human body with skin on the top and bones to form the skeleton but are we a single mesh of consciousness or are we spread across ?

Arguably , consious agent is also made of number os machines. Trillions of very complex machines. Each holding a piece of decryted knowlede. If you think of conciousness as an immense field of mesh where matrix binds the knowledge for each manifestation , each machine and concious agents then we are not a single mesh. We are spread over a vast area ouselves. When we awaken - arguably all the area in our control lights up. When we darken a vast area darkens. 

And imagine a mesh of trillions of concious agents.. What is with in us is also spread all around in all the directions. The construct remains the same. The spread can be as big as you can imagine, or as small as you want to think. 

The idea is as an awakened conscious agent, if you perceive all the mesh lighted up around you, it is one state ; if you see darkness all around , it is another state. Both these states represent where duality ends. These are the beginnings or ends of eons. 

# Kalpa

Such change of state , from one extreme to another is marked by a `Yuga` - Eon. You can think of this as `Yajna` of entire universe as a single concious entity. Kalpa is a cicle. There is no start or end. Just the different states of decryption of knowledge or rise of the matrix. 
## Life cycle of Manifestation

I guess a serialized list is the easiest way to communicate but the reader knows these things may occur out of order or might even overlap ..

- A desire takes birth  - `Icha`
- You take a vow to make it happen - `Sankalpa` - Starting of a `Kalpa`
    - You start the actions - Start of `Yajna`
    - Phase 1 - You gain tremendous knowledge. Every session is opening up new things - `Sattva`
    - Phase 2 - You have something already in you but you don't know how to communicate it. You are in constant struggle with in you if it should be revealed, if yes how ? Is album a right way or a single chart .  Or should I make it a concert ? Should I make it free or charge for it. Will others get advantage of my creation ? You spend a lot of time in this though you still continue to practice. The hopes are high. Ideas are good - Basically you spin on three legs. Enjoy/ decrypt the knowledge, figure out the shape of information , figure out the manufacturing process - `Treta`. 
    - Phase 3 - Knowledge is complete. Artifact is ready. Reveal the information or not - `Dwaper`
    - Phase 4 - Information is fully baked in , you automate the information dissemination - It could be home runs, a you tube video , millions of copies of the book you wrote, concerts - `Kali`.
- End of Actions - End of Yajna
- Desire is fulfilled - If the outcome was favorable - you are happy, otherwise it is a pain. 
- Information is consumed by the target conscious agents. It is stale , useless . A book on the shelf that you don't even care to dust. - End of `Kalpa`. 
- The knowledge is still in decrypted stage with you. You can see a many new possibilities that are hidden to others. You will need to gain more knowledge to realize those possibilities - hence a new desire. And start of next `Kalpa`
- And the cycle continues. 


You continue to decrypt the knowledge and manifest. Information keeps getting added till there are possibilities to decrypt the knowledge. You exit the game when the knowledge is fully decrypted - `Nirvana`. 

Information keeps on adding and keeps adding and getting stale. The stale information is all the unconscious universe we can observe but it is not current. These automated artifacts run our universe but we don't pay any attention. No one opens the refrigerator compressor to figure out how it cools as long as the damn thing works. All you care if the beers got chilled or not 


