Our world is made of waves. Electromagnetic waves are the ones that seem to engulf everything around us such as  visible light or radio waves. Visible light is kinda misnomer because it is not that we can see the visible light, it is in fact the way we see the things. Our eyes are a sensor that can receive the information trough the visible part of EM spectrum , just like a radio antenna may interpret the signal from the radio waves. We know that EM waves have a broad spectrum starting from radio waves on one side with longest wavelength to the gamma rays on the other side with the shortest wavelength. Gamma rays may get so much energetic that they may feel like matter - just like bullets being fired from an airgun. They are quite nasty. 

Thus we can say that our Eyes are a sensor to detect a very tiny sliver of electromagnetic waves. Its a great natural choice because most of the X-rays and Gamma-rays anyway don't reach us because the Earth's atmosphere reflects them back. Thus there is no point building a sensor for such rays to live our lives in our tiny box. And the best part is visible light can travel from across the galaxies to us. Well we may not be able to distinguish those stars because there are just too many right here in our cosmic backyard but the point is , light can reach any distance. So developing a sensor like eyes is very useful thing. Even better news is the visible light is reflected by the solids. So the waves of visible light, can be used to see the solids. That is exactly what eyes are for :-) And God , they look colorful because visible light has a full rainbow with in it. Such is the beauty of our tiny box.

But how do we confirm the existence of solids. How do we know that the solids that we are seeing are not a video projection on some grand large screen. Turns out we are gifted with another sensor that can help us distinguish the solids from thin air. And that sensor is spread all over our body - it is called the sense of Touch. It is important to have this sense spread all over us because you don't want to miss the brick that hit the back of your head. You want to know immediately if someone nudged you at your back. So how do we feel the solids ? What exactly is sense of Touch ? For this we need little bit of history of our science..

Back in the day, the scientist supreme Mr Einstein had proved that the light actually behaves like a particle. Hmm - didn't we say it's a wave. Well Einstein got his Nobel by turning the truth upside down. He showed that light travels with tiny particles what he called Photons. And to prove the point , he showed that Photons of certain frequency can knock off an Electron from the surface. What frequency , which surface is not important but this meant the visible light was NOT just  a smooth wave, It did have a particle nature. And that gave rise to the idea that has mesmerized the scientists as well as philosophers - what we call wave -particle nature of everything we got around us. Of course Einstein used Maxwell's equations to prove his point and that makes Maxwell the grand daddy of modern science. But the idea of Einstein that a wave may behave like a particle, forced uncle De Brogli to think the opposite. If wave can act like a particle , is it possible that all the matter - the solids that we touch and feel may also act like a wave. He submitted his PhD thesis n 1923 that was summarily rejected by his PI as stupid mental math. To his good luck, somehow his paper made it to Einstein. You see Einstein is everywhere - like God. Einstein saw his paper and not only agreed to math but he gave him a Thumbs Up. BTW this was the first time (and probably only time) that a PhD thesis won the Nobel prize. Now that is called a real brilliant science. BTW it took world six long years to understand what Brogli proved so the prize came in 1929 . I guess it was totally worth the wait because the idea laid the foundation of Quantum Mechanics. What De Brogli showed us is known as "Matter waves". He showed that the tiny electrons are actually a wave. And they are very different from the Electromagnetic waves. 

Well you might feel that electrons are moving in a wave - like up and down - nope - that is NOT a matter wave. Well, it is easy to say what is "NOT" a matter wave but it is almost impossible to perceive a matter wave. It is beyond our sensory realm in the sense we can't see these waves but instead when matter waves come together such that their amplitude peaks up like a tsunami - that is where the particle shows up. In other words , particle can be anywhere in the entire universe but it shows up only where the matter waves come together to peak up the crest. And obviously, if matter waves are opposing such that they cancel each other than obviously we feel nothing there. And here is the worst part , these matter waves are so small that we have no instrument to measure them (unless particle is tiny like an electron or a sodium atom) . But that is a good news too because, since the waves are so small, we can feel the solids as persistent pieces of matter. In other words the baseball that you are holding in your hand is blinking. It is actually vanishing and showing up but it does it so fast that we feel it is always there. Even electromagnetic waves - such as visible light, can't tell the difference - and that is why we not only feel the baseball but we also consistently see it in our hand. Or we can say that the matter waves are so short that even the electromagnetic waves can't go through them. BTW this led to discovery of Electron microscope - simply cuz electron's matter waves are way tinier than our visible light , that means they can be lot more precise if we develop a sensor that can react to electrons just the way our eyes react to visible light (or photons). 

Enough o Physics -:)

Lets get back to our real world. We have eyes to see the solids , we have touch to feel them. In a way touch is confirmation of what we saw or vice-versa. If two sensors agree with each other that means the base ball is real. Else it is something in a youtube video. But there is a problem. How do we know what is beyond the solids ? Visible light reflects from them.. Our hands can't go past the wall of our room. Then how do we know if someone is there across the wall  ? Thankfully we have one more wave that can travel through solids. We call such waves in the category of sound waves. These waves muscle through their waves across solids by vibrating them. Now - don't confuse them with radio waves - radio waves are electromagnetic waves - they behave differently. Listening to a transistor is not same as me calling you to get out of the bathroom. But the sensor that we use for radio waves create the same effect as speaking by vibrating a speaker. So radio waves mostly emulate the act of speaking. So ultimately it feels same if a radio is playing in adjacent room or you are singing in your lovely voice. And the sensor that we have to capture these radio waves is - you got it - our Ears. Always open - unlike eyes , they are always eager to hear the sounds - well - sound waves to be precise. 


I had be wrong if I say there are three types of waves corresponding to three sensors we have. There is actually one more that we recently discovered that we call Gravitational waves but they are so rare that we have no way to feel, hear or see them. Science is working hard to understand better as they are literally the waves of space-time. In essence the entire reality around us is a wave but unfortunately, we mere mortals , we don't have an express sense to perceive gravitational waves. But the point that I want to make is - EVERYTHING IS A WAVE. We see , feel and hear ONLY waves. In nutshell our sensory reality is nothing but a mumbo jumbo of waves - of different nature , of different wavelengths , amplitudes and thus frequencies. If that is so , would it be wrong to think that we too are a wave ! A special kind of wave that has some sensors attached to it to perceive a reality - a tiny box.

