If you are following Gita , particularly from chapter seven onwards , you must have noticed a logical flow building out. This flow is an indicator that Gita is just one conversation. The chapters and their names are given much later to highlight their significance. And to allow readers a way to mindmark the ideas.

- In chapter seven Krishna defined his lower nature - the material world ; and the upper nature - the consciousness which he termed as the soul. Think of these as two separate aspect of the modern science. Quantum Mechanics, particularly, Quantum Field theory is our best attempt at understanding the material world around us. Whereas computing , particularly artificial intelligence is our best shout out to understanding consciousness. Chapter 7 describes material nature as arisen from 3 fundamental forces - Sattva , Rajsa and Tamsa. And it leads to eight-fold material creation. This fits metaphorically with modern approach of the science. Three quarks creating eight-fold subatomic particles - the Hadrons that make up most of the visible mass in universe. Three quarks creating eight-fold subatomic particles - the Hadrons that make up most of the visible mass in universe. It is essential to know the origin and spread of mass because that is what all the stuff in universe boils down to - a single metric - the gravity.
- Chapter 8 builds on this binary nature -  two aspects - material and soul. Defining the framework of this universe that we understood with a game analogy. The entire architecture of the game. The  underlying code (Brāhmaṇa), the run time ( Adhhi Daiva) , The game policies ( Adhi-bhuta) and role of an autonomous conscious being (Adhyatma). Yet he says he is beyond the game. The entire manifestation of the material world as well as the conscious beings are suspended with in the divine. The creation he explains as a creator, happens through Visarga . The act of letting go. A state beyond cause and effect because there is no desire for the actions. Desire is what creates karmik bondage - to the game. The very perception of the reaction (of actions) is due to attached desires. He explains that the two natures  - the upper and lower - are part of the game, yet he himself, as a creator is beyond the game. He doesn't play. The way you, as a coder, are not attached to any of the avatars with the game you create, he is not attached to beings or things. Yet he is imminent in every thing the game offers.
- Chapter 9 provides core instructions to the conscious beings - a path to attain his own state while staying with in the game. A state where humans may reach the state of his own divine essence. The promise is , if you follow the core instructions, he takes care of your well-being. Not only that, he says, his devotee, is he himself.
- And here in chapter ten, Krishna describes his own reflections. A method to recognize his essence with in this game and beyond. He states the entire universe is held with a tiny fraction of his craft - a divine creator. This is where we come back to science again. The question is how does his grace works? In scientific realm we call it gravity ? The force that acts at infinitely long distances and holds the universe together. Not letting galaxies and clusters of stars fly away.

The science is beyond doubt that the observable universe is just a tiny fraction of all that is out there. The mass in the observable space is just too less to account for the gravity. Where is this gravity coming from then ? And why is gravity so hard to assimilate with other three fundamental forces of material nature?  If you take the Einsteinian approach , then there is no scope of other three forces that create and decay the material world - the strong, week and electromagnetic force. If you go with Quantum field theory, we can't explain gravity. The scientific attempts to explain gravity seem like voodoo magic. The string theory needs 11 dimensions and infinite universes (multiverses) , the ADS-QFT needs four physical dimensions and asserts that our world is a hologram. 

Yet we know for sure that there is more to what meets the eyes. For lack of better word, scientists call it Dark Energy or Dark matter. Something beyond our scientific apparatus. Gita says even Gods are part of his upper manifestation. The underlying code may be. But knowing Krishna is beyond Gods too. He is the science and spirit together. An underlying field that creates both - the perception and the perceived - through his sheer glory. And he lets them go to enjoy autonomy , free will and also lets them have a path to liberation.  The question alone however is not enough to rest our anxieties. Vaidik science provides the answer where modern one struggles. We don't know the source of gravity , we  thus call it rising out of dark matter. We don't even know how does it fit with other three fundamental forces of material nature. In chapter ten, Lord explains his grace. And leave the clues for us to understand nature of gravity.

## Vichaar , Karma , and Visarga

To understand the source and perpetuity of material nature , though cyclic ; we need to understand three fundamental concepts of divine.  As beings of material nature we can't live without any of and all of them are required to understand divine glory.  Meaning they are not good or bad. The intent isn't to give up one in favor of another. Intent is to understand how these three together create glory.

The first component is Vichaar - the thought. Thought is the start of bondage. Thought leads to action - Karma. Action is bondage. At this stage you might be inclined to assume that both these being source of bondage are good candidates for renunciation. Most of the religions preach that as well. Give up thought , give up actions. Lord expressly forbids such a practice. Why - because it is not possible.  The third part  - Visarga , solves the mystery. 

Visarga is state of thought and consequent actions where one gets over the desires. The normal question is - how is it even possible . This is what Lord explains in chapter 10. Look at Sun. It shows up every day. It burns for no good reason. This leads to glory. Sun is far away. We don't know if it is even conscious. Then look at your own heart. Where lord says he resides. It pumps seventy times a minutes. Continuously. The moment it stops , body falls. This is what is dear to lord. Continuous action where thought fades away. Repetitive task. Based on your assigned goal. These actions don't bind. They are the very source of glory. Lord gives umpteen examples of such excellence. Because Visarga is the very impulse of creation. Universe and all the examplary  things in the universe are created because of Visarga. In this state , what happens to thought ? Thought fades away and it only remembers the creator. The very source of continuous creation. The source of all grace and gravity. 

Thus thought - resolution of orientation ; action - resolution of duty ; and Visarga - resolution of desires - these three create and are the source of all. Such thought is called Krishna consciousness !

Let's listen to the ode. 
