---

 With written word not only we got on-demand access to immutable information, the storage capacity too got a massive boost.  Library of Alexandria, built by Ptolemy in early days of transcription ( around 3rd century bc), presumably had between 70K to 700k "Papyrus" rolls. A conversion into a modern textbook size should end up to say 200k books - a lot, given they were all hand written and carefully transported to Alexandria for safe keeping, and reference. But we didn't stop there - it is estimated that there are over 130 million books in existence as of 2021.

And finally, with digital medium, we inoculated our information store with third booster. Internet is still in its infancy, somewhat like Library of Alexandria was to the "Papyrus" world. As of 2021, there were over 1.83 billion websites. The amount of data stored on the internet is estimated to be in the zettabyte range (One zettabyte is equivalent to a billion terabytes). Which means, it is already close to  a BILLION libraries of Alexandria. Assuming a standard textbook takes ~5 Mb of disc space, a Terabyte of storage ( a normal laptop these days), may accommodate 200,000 books. You and me carry a library of Alexandria in our backpacks !

 The comparison above is certainly not 'apple to apple' because data on the internet (and on our computers) contains machine logs, code, graphics and hundreds of other formats but the point really is to show case our external memory heap grew almost a billion times in a span of two thousand years. And this pace is only increasing. As of now we are doubling the internet every two years. In nutshell, we are now at a point that no human could ever read all the books in print,  much less the content stored on internet -> Hence the tools such as search and chatbots.

There is one more problem : the books are not linked to each other in one single progressive chain. They spread like a tree.  If an information network is absolutely aligned - each block with unique predecessor and a unique successor then it is called a "value chain". The opportunity to create a value chain, presents itself, only when we discover a new mode communication. 

When `Dwaipayana` wrote `Mahabharata` in a series of eighteen books progressively covering the history of entire civilization, it was a single value chain. 

A value chain is prerequisite for value exchange. In essence humanity warmed up to a possibility of a "universal agreement". It initiated a move from "one on one spoken agreements - barter" to the idea of "consensus based value exchange". It was a quantum jump.

 This is not to say there weren't thousands of different narratives in the spoken sphere - as many stories as many mouths! In `Vaidik` parlance these narratives are called `Puranas (old stories)`. But to text-enabled humans, there was only one definition of truth. They were like cypherpunks of eighties and nineties. They created a single universal value-exchange protocol of that time - Gold ! In our world, "code" defines the similar progression. We have millions of narratives in our books but to those who think and live at the intersection of mathematics and computer code, the truth is now beyond geographies or  human languages - even beyond computer languages. As such their branch is now experiencing quantum jump  and thus is ripe to implement a new universal value-exchange protocol.

The purpose of a value exchange protocol is to - as the name suggests - transfer value without intermediaries. Whenever there are intermediaries (gate keepers or value additions), they demand a cut in value exchange. While paying for their services is not a bad idea in itself; but the risks are way higher than the benefits. Such centralized agencies can create new winners and losers in global landscape. For example a burger is valued at ten dollars in West while a better or similar quality burger is valued at one dollar in India. Same amount of work but vastly different value! Why ? because the centralization of monetary system offers a 10 x advantage to western manufacturers. This advantage distorts the flow of migrant workers, which in turn leads to necessity of walls on the border or outsourcing the work to cheaper locations. While there is no question on utility of organising the workforce for a target goal e.g. corporations or nation states; the underlying value exchange protocol must be: 
- permission less:  anyone may participate without identifying themselves to a central authority;

- censor resistant: no one is allowed to stop anyone from participating;

- consensus based: all participants fully buy into the mechanics of the protocol - no currency wars.

Such a protocol leads to an immutable method of value exchange. It creates parity for those who are dedicated in `Yazna` to create something - irrespective to their physical location, color , orientation or class. In essence it becomes an immutable ledger of `Karma`. Early text-enabled community found this protocol in Gold. Cypherpunks found it in Bitcoin. This is the reason bitcoin is called digital Gold. The key point, however, is to believe in ideology. Token in itself is pretty useless (either Gold coin or bitcoin), if it is seen without deep trust in underlying premise. Manifestation of token is thus in extreme alignment of ideology - a value chain. A value chain comes into fruition only when participants across man made barriers communicate on a totally new channel that is order of magnitude more effective in attaining consensus - a quantum jump -> spoken word to written word to digital word.

`Dwaipayana` triggered the value chain with text through first scribed narrative - `Mahabharata`. With mathematics and code we are converting it into a digital format.


