`Shantanu` was left alone. More he tried to stop `Ganga` more quickly she wanted to leave. She pointed to the king that he can't stop the flow of time and water. But the life did stop pulsing pleasures for `Shantanu`. He lost faith in reality. If him being a king couldn't get his love, what was the point of all the wealth and armies. At times, he wanted to renounce the world but `Dev` was too young to handle the politics. He didn't want his son to pay the price of his messed up love life. He heard people talking that the king had to pay the price of unorthodox marriage. They said it was the result of not following the laid down rituals. A king's wedding should have happened as per the protocol. The politics with in his circles got trickier as many lobbyists wanted their girls married to the king. Saying a ‘no’, to a proposal, was always a ‘lose-lose’ situation. But no one felt like `Ganga`. And nothing clicked like she did. 

He tried to get out of grief in hunting and drinking but nothing worked. The only thing that made him lose himself was the work. Work turned into passion for him. He didn't understand that it was `Karm Yoga` that was pulling him out of grief but he could feel the presence of something magical. More he focused on work, more interesting it became. People slowly forgot his marriage debacle and they started appreciating the tireless efforts he put in getting the complex balance of power into absolute equilibrium. First he handled the problem of `Asuras` — drove them out of his land, into their own dedicated kingdom. All without using a single arrow — through endless negotiations and diplomacy. Many `Asura` leaders deaths were attributed to the king but he knew the truth. He never ordained any assassination. Next, he took the works started by `Ganga` to fruition. Every city and village was connected through bridges. A vast irrigation system was set up. `Dev` led all these developmental efforts. And lastly he made sure no one in his kingdom slept hungry, without a roof or without proper clothes. The three basics were the responsibility of the state. 

As the prince turned into a flawless statesman, the king finally thought taking time off for himself. As a matter of fact, 'time off' was recommended by master mason who was concerned for king's health. He wanted king to spend few months in fresh air of `Himalayas`. But the king wanted to spend more time visiting regions around `Yamuna` for he thought he spent more time on `Ganges`. And he wanted to meet grass root people — to understand their lives — live like them — face the pleasures and pains of life like a commoner.

Having made sure that the kingdom was on auto-pilot, and `Dev` was fully plugged in, `Shantanu` handed over the reins to the prince and took on this long journey to the farthest reaches of his state. Part of his motivation was to see if `Dev` could run the kingdom in his absence. And the other part was obviously to let go the responsibilities and live his own life for whatever was left of it. As part of his journey, he paid visits to many `Ashramas` and `Gurukuls` to earn good will as well to find the deeper meaning of life and it's purpose.

Many months into the journey, king learnt the people were not as happy as he was told. There was rampant rise of debate. Most of his local representatives were spending enormous time and effort on rituals rather than putting in hard work to resolve the problems of common people. He was not sure how to handle this problem. He was caught into duality. What is the right path? He had heard about that `Maharishi Parāśara` advocated another path to peace. A path focused more on `Karma` than resorting all the time in pleasing the deities. And it had been a while he visited `Madhu` forest. A part of his kingdom, that still had infestation of `Asuras`. It had to be a clandestine visit. He and only few of his chosen body guards. 

King and his chosen men, set up a camp many miles before Yamuna in a part of the forest that was rarely visited by locals. Forest was dense such that even the fire smoke was beyond anyone's easy notice. On his way, he was told that the `Ashrama` of `Maharishi Parāśara` was just across the river. He had heard about the philosophy of `Maharishi` and his support for scribing the knowledge rather than spending too much time on rituals. He wanted to meet `Maharishi` to discuss his own conundrum but the other side of `Yamuna` was beyond his official territory - claimed by variety of `Asura` lords. No one objected to people crossing state boundaries but for a king, it could be deemed as an act of aggression - it could trigger a political situation and turn into an unnecessary conflict that he wanted to avoid at any rate. But he did want to see `Maharishi` and he had heard about `Krishna` - the magical son of `Maharishi`.

To avoid unnecessary conflict, `Shantanu` decided to dress up like a commoner and cross the river with normal commuters. Not even his body guards. One fine morning, he advised his bodyguards to stay put and he rode his horse to the bank of `Yamuna`. He tied his  horse a mile before the docks and walked like a peasant to the docks. It was not uncommon for `Shantanu` to visit parts of his state dressed like a farmer or a blacksmith. It was a common practice for kings (and ministers) to mix with masses to get a pulse on the "state of the union". The only difference here was he was heading to an unchartered territory. In a way, it was exciting for `Shantanu` for he was tired of the security cordon that came with position of power. He wanted to feel unsecured, and unhinged.

As the luck would have it, `Satyawati's` boat reached this side of the bank as soon as `Shantanu` arrived there. A sandalwood fragrance captured the bank. Deers and peacocks flocked to the bank along with waiting commuters to get a chance on `Satyawati's` magical boat. King was mesmerized by the scene. He couldn't have imagined the beauty and serenity of the situation. As he realized, he was dressed like a commoner, he too got into the line to get on the boat.

The ride took more than an hour but for `Shantanu`, the time stood still. He was almost staring at `Satyawati` and when she started singing, with the waves of `Yamuna`, he was teleported to another world. First time in years, he wanted to fall in love. He wanted to keep listening to `Satyawati's` folk songs rooted in morning `raagas`. He had never thought music could be so evoking.

As the boat reached the village wharf, commuters started disembarking. `Shantanu` kept sitting in the boat. Someone nudged him that it was time to get down. People were throwing the fare in a bucket, expressing their thanks to the crew for a beautiful morning ride and hurried to their daily chores. `Shantanu` got up and without a word, he dropped all the gold coins he was carrying in the bucket. He hadn't even walked few yards that he heard `Satyawati`. As he turned back, she was getting off the boat — Sir, looks like you left all your wealth for us!  She had gold coins in her hand and she wanted to return them back. 

These pieces of metal are nothing for the experience I had this morning ! — said the disguised king — maybe you can give me a ride back in the evening for I have nothing left on me. And he turned and walked away from the bank. Another minute there, and he thought he would fall for the beautiful woman. She is definitely not of this village - he thought, maybe not even a Earthling.

Where are you heading to? — asked `Satyawati` — still not sure if she should take so much Gold. She was sure `Dashraaj` would be pleased, but something in her felt that this wasn't a common commuter. 

I am going to see `Maharishi Parāśara`. Would you be kind enough to point me the direction. I heard he lives nearby — said `Shantanu`.

The Ashram is half a mile to the North — `Satyawati` quickly added — and I will be here waiting for you to get you back across `Yamuna`. And she raised her hand. She felt as if `Maharishi's` prophecy was taking shape. This is the man that she was waiting for. Despite his age, he had an aura of a statesman. `Satyawati` was drawn to him. The fact that he was rich and he left everything he had for her was a sign that she was looking for.

------
`Krishna` was only eleven years old and he had already completed his education as a `Snataka`. `Maharishi` was keen to see if he wanted to pursue `Naad Yoga` or he was inclined to be a `Nyaan Yogi`. Having understood all the scriptures at this early age, `Maharishi` believed he would choose right path for himself. `Maharishi` was always careful to not impress his own desires on `Krishna`. The path he chose must come from with in him. That said, `Maharishi` had all the time for him. They swam together in `Yamuna`. And they ate together — Often resolving questions of young `Krishna`. And many times, even `Maharishi` had no answers to his quest.

`Maharishi` and his students were getting ready for the morning meal when king arrived at the `Ashrama`. Since he was dressed like a farmer, `Maharishi` thought he must have been bothered by some `Asura` lord. `Maharishi` asked him to join them for food before they sit down to talk. King was thoroughly impressed with the care and love `Maharishi` graced to a commoner. The food was simple — milk and fruits. `Maharishi` and all his students ate cooked meal only once a day before the sunset. In summer afternoons they drank buttermilk — leftovers after taking butter out of yogurt — with a pinch of salt. In winter, they drank a hot drink made with milk and herbs from `Assam` — a place far far East. Sometimes they added raw sugar cane syrup (`Gud`) to this hot drink, later named "tea" by Britishers. During lunch, they chatted about the latest happenings in and around `Ashrama`. `Maharishi` always heard everything with keen interest but rarely spoke. The chats were always light. No discussion about scriptures or serious matters of governance of `Ashrama`.

After lunch, `Maharishi` and king, walked around the `Ashrama`. A daily routine `Maharishi` promoted to all his students. Students were allowed to nap afterwards before starting evening chores and classes. Few minutes into the walk, `Maharishi` asked the disguised king to tell his name and village and the reason of his visit. `Shantanu` reached into his inner pocket and pulled out the king's stamp — a cast that only king or his authorized messengers could carry (on person) to identify themselves. With the stamp in hand, words of a messenger were the words of the king. The written messages from kings were still uncommon. For one, it was hard to write long messages and second, kings thought it was hard to describe the emotional context of the message in written format. Only an authorized messenger could fully explain kings dictum along with the thoughtful context that led to the decree. In sensitive matters, king would often call the person(s) for a private conversation. General decrees were sent to city or village heads through messengers who were responsible for talking one on one with every single family in their area.

`Maharishi` was surprised to see the kings stamp in the hands of a man dressed like a farmer. The very next moment he realized that this was none other than the emperor of the vast kingdom himself. He folded his hands as a welcome gesture, and welcomed the king to `Ashrama` with due respect. He also asked why such sudden visit on this side, and escorted the king to his personal hut. He hoped the food was enough for he thought kings had big appetites. Once in his rather modest hut, `Maharishi` showed the king a place to sit, same height as his own. A gesture for equanimity and respect. And probably because both `Shantanu` and `Maharishi` were almost of the same age.

King settled down with a smile. In a way he was relieved for he had heard stories of `Śakti Muni` and also that `Maharishi Parāśara` didn't subscribe to the rules of the state. With folded hands — a gesture to reciprocate the kind welcome, he said — `Maharishi`, I was in this area to visit the citizens here, and I thought I must pay you a visit. As far as this dress up, I didn't want to stir any troubles with the `Asuras` and make your stay here any difficult. 

`Maharishi` thanked him for his thoughtfulness. And paused to let king make the pitch. He didn't want to lead him into any direction. He was pretty sure, king had a good reason to visit.

The king took his time. He wanted to make sure that he chose the right words. Finally, he said — `Maharishi`, I have been traveling across the kingdom and many times dressed like a local to blend with people. I find that people are generally not happy. They are lost into rituals and rituals have become a means to spend and celebrate. Even the poor citizens who can't afford rituals are forced into such acts because of social pressures. I like celebrations but it is getting to a point where we are losing focus on the work. I guess I am struggling to find work ethic and this is leading to lessening prosperity. Citizens are not much ready to face a catastrophe as their previous generation were. No one understands that we as a race are not beyond calamities and God only helps those who help themselves. I am not sure if it is with in the rights of a king to bring a sense of work responsibility back to the masses or if this message was something that might be led by a `Maharishi` such as you.

`Maharishi` thought for a while. He felt his worst nightmare was turning into truth. He always thought that rituals had only symbolic value. He believed `Naad Yogies` must only convey the messages of super sages and not indulge in building their own communities. Communities were for the kings to build (and maintain) not for the `Yogies`. But again he remembered his vow that he would not write a book himself. He neither wanted to spearhead a messaging campaign without well crafted written scripture to back it up. He brought his gaze back to the king — `Maharaaj` (O king of kings), this message must be for the next generation for it is hard to change the value system of current generation. It is for your son and my son to craft, plan and communicate such a narrative. And they must do so at their own impulse — not as an instigation from us two. 

King was impressed with the wisdom of `Maharishi`. A big load off his chest as he understood we all must pass on the baton to the next generation. That reminded him of `Krishna`. The divine child who every one talked about. He again folded his hands and said — `Maharishi`, very well said. If you think appropriate, how about we pose this question to `Krishna` to see what the next generation think about work ethics verses over reliance on deities. I have heard he is already a `Snataka` at a tender age!

`Maharishi` knew `Shantanu` was consummate negotiator. No one could bring such peace (and rule of law) to such a vast land without the gift of gab. The king knew his way to involve people and make them a voluntary participant rather than holding their feet to his orders. And he was in agreement with what king said. His only concern was if `Krishna`, a ten-year old, was ready for such a loaded question. He thought for a moment. If one must fail, he should rather fail early. And more important — he must believe in his own astrological prediction. If `Krishna` was here to change the world, he must be able to handle difficult questions early on. He called a nearby student and asked him to summon `Krishna`.

The king saw a skinny dark boy with his head shaven as `Krishna` entered the room. He bowed down to his father and the visitor and asked how he could help. `Maharishi` introduced the king and told him that king is here to meet the `Ashram`. Could you please organize a general session after the nap time. King may like to talk to students and ask their opinions on the matters of state and governance. 

As `Krishna` left, `Maharishi` pointed king to large hut with a windmill atop - `Maharaaj` you must be tired, why don't you relax for a bit. I will send someone for you for the evening session.

The hut was spacious. Kinda like a guest room that could accommodate a decent size group. The key attraction was the paddle fan that was powered by rotation of windmill. King was very impressed by the engineering particularly for all the equipment was built of wood. No metal or bricks. There was a big pedestal of wood, with white cotton cloth that could double up as a large bed. As king stretched his back, he though about the events of the day. His mind kept going back to `Satyawati`. He didn't know when he fell asleep. It must be good two hours before his sleep was broken by a slow knock on the door. It was `Krishna`. He bowed down and asked if King was ready to join the students and `Maharishi`. 

`Maharishi` had around twenty students. Very few compared to other more commercially oriented `Gurukuls` for `Maharishi` was really picky in choosing the students. Since there was always a threat of `Asuras`, students were extensively trained in arms and physical strength in addition to hard curricula of scriptures. They all stood up from ground as the king entered the open space surrounded with big Banyan trees. There was no roof. The sunlight was passing through the Banyans to the ground and one could hear the gushing waters of `Yamuna` nearby. It was a peaceful place. King took a seat by `Maharishi`. `Maharishi` introduced the king and asked him to address the students and also pitch the questions that he had in mind. 

After thanking `Maharishi` and the students for taking the time without a planned schedule, king talked couple of minutes about the state of the administration. The great work that his son was doing on the water ways. The peaceful treaties with most of the neighboring states and still unresolved conflicts with `Asuras`. He finally got down the issue of exponential increase in number and extent of rituals. To keep the question open-ended, he asked — What you all think about `Naad Yoga` verses `Nyaan Yoga`. Which is better and why? 

And he suggested they speak from youngest to the eldest so that youngsters got first chance without having to be swayed by the thoughts of their seniors. And probably he wanted to hear `Krishna` first and wanted him to have most time for he was the youngest of the lot.

`Krishna` stood up. He folded both his hands and looked up to `Maharishi` for his permission to speak. Having seen the nod, he met king's curious gaze and said — `Maharaaj` Yoga is means to connect with our inner spirit — `Atma`. It is immaterial how one accomplishes this key element, for the peace is elusive to those who aren't connected to themselves. That said `Nyaan Yoga` and `Naad Yoga` are like two wheels of a chariot. It is incumbent on `Nyaan Yogies` to decrypt the knowledge and in the same manner `Naad Yogies` are obligated to manifest that knowledge as accurately as humanly possible. Think of these as two banks of a mighty river. The water that flows in this river is known as ˝information˝ Just the way people use water for different purposes — for a thirsty, it quenches the thirst — for a farmer it is the means of irrigation — for a sailor it is transport ; Information may be used by people in different ways but the ultimate goal of everyone is to use this information for connecting to themselves.

`Maharishi` was satisfied with the answer. This was a standard message he gave to all the graduating scholars. This was the code of conduct for aspiring `Yogies`, from `Maharishi's Ashrama`, whichever stream they might choose -`Nyaan Yoga` of `Naad Yoga`.

King was thoroughly impressed with the equanimity of the views held by a ten-year-old. There was no doubt in the young teen. His thoughts as clear as the bright sunny day. The king, however, wanted to hear more. He added — I can't agree more, but I have a follow-up for the `Yogi`. If I may, and he looked at `Maharishi` for approval. 

After getting a green signal from `Maharishi`, king asked - What if one of the bank of this ˝river of information˝ gets week such that it leads to leakage of floods, who is there to fix it?

King didn't want to mention anything controversial about expanding scope of rituals in a general gathering of young grads. He thus planted a subtle question. `Maharishi` smiled at the tactfulness of king though he expected nothing less. He was worried if `Krishna` could handle such an indirect comment.

It didn't take a minute for `Krishna` to respond — `Maharaaj`, the kingdom is the community of the king. That is the reason king is sometimes called `Praja Pati` - one who owns the people. It is for the king to shape his garden the way s/he deems right. If one bank gives way, it must be fortified. All `Ashramas` have autonomy on what (and how) they teach, but if their teachings impact the community, it is for the king to manage the situation. For example even `Asuras` have their own `Maharishis`. They even have their kingdom managed by `Asura Maharishi Vrishaparvan`. King chose to give them a separate land, far North, because their message appeared to break the fabric of `Kuru` society. Like wise no school is beyond king's ultimate responsibility, be it a school of `Nyaan Yoga` or `Naad Yoga`.

King was struck with the speed and clarity that `Krishna` responded with. His mind as sharp as his keen eyes. Knowledge seemed to flow from him. Even `Maharishi` was pleasantly surprised. `Krishna` was speaking his thoughts but he didn't recall he ever shared politics of the a school of prevailing situation with `Krishna`. In his mind, rising social status of `Naad Yogies` was to be blamed for the rise of `Asuras`. Who could it be! Did `Krishna` meet `Satyawati`? - He thought but kept quiet with a smile on his face and trust in his eyes. Whoever it was, `Krishna` spoke the truth and truth is always right.

King continued the conversations — Since you spoke about king's responsibilities `Krishna`, what else do you think is important for king? — his eyes full of appreciation. He was genuinely curious what a child `Yogi` thought about king's job description.

`Krishna` folded his hands. He said — `Maharaaj`, I have no experience of the politics so I seek pardon before I share what I have gathered from scriptures. 

King looked at the child prodigy with love and respect - `Krishna` your views are immense value for me. And I seek your vantage for I am truly curious. This is not a test. This is a conversation.

Having understood where the king was coming from, `Krishna` spoke calmly - `Maharaaj` king's first responsibility is security of his lands for without a safe border there exists no kingdom. Second is law and order because a kingdom always have a threat from internal chaos. Third, is well-being of his populace because unproductive people seek abrupt changes. Fourth is a well grounded succession plan, because most anarchies occur during transfer of power and finally a king must provide his citizens an able queen, for only a woman may speak "heart to heart" with fairer population. Information travels faster in women that it does with men. As such, queen plays the vital role of managing quicker informal communications. Thus scripture demands a king to have a wedded queen at all the times. The way men pride in their king and seek leadership from him, women do so in their queen. Gender harmony is the basis of Monarchy.

The king was satisfied with `Krishna`. His council was always after him to formally marry `Ganga` and after she left, there were many proposals duly vetted by his council. But no one had ever explained to him "why" the way `Krishna` put it. He did spend more time with other senior students and had many of his trivial questions answered. He didn't realize the sun was already setting in the west - time passed quickly. He quickly concluded the session thanking `Maharishi` and all his students for the opportunity and sought to leave for he needed to cross the river back to his camp and he was wondering if `Satyawati` was waiting for him.

On his way out, the king invited `Maharishi` to visit the capital. He said he wanted to discuss further the affirmative action that he must take to curb and contain the rituals. `Maharishi` smiled and said - `Maharaaj`, many times the best way to contain something is to ignore it. If you must do something, then you might consider giving the people a new narrative. Sometimes, the best way to shorten a line is to draw a slightly bigger line by it's side. The way `Nyaan Yoga` is for knowledge seekers, `Naad Yoga` is for communicators, a leader of the masses may have their own ideology - `Karm Yoga` - action orientation. And frankly, I think peace is only accessible to those who act righteously. 

What exactly is `Karm Yoga` - king had never heard of this term before. 

`Maharishi` thought it wouldn't be a justice to the king or the concept itself, to explain it as an 'out of the door' discussion. But this was probably only window he would ever get to rope a seed in king's brain - `Mahaaraj` it is a state of body and mind where we scan the surroundings to seek what objective physical reality demands of us, and we do exactly the same. Important aspect is to do away all the desires because desires either force us to do something different or they make us action less.

King was impressed with the simplicity of idea. He also realized getting rid of desires was an uphill task. He asked — `Maharishi` is there any scripture that I could refer to. Have you written down your thoughts.

`Maharishi` responded with a smile — `Maharaaj`, this scripture is yet to be written for the scripture of this sort only elucidate the actions of `Karm Yogi` in the most difficult of circumstances. Before we write something down, we need a public figure to act righteously — his or her entire life. We are waiting for such a leader!

King was a bit intrigued with a blunt answer — most other scriptures are written by sages without a specific example. Why this one needs to follow a true story?

Question was valid. Maharishi understood the spirit - `Maharaaj` if I write this as something that I think, than it would be purely my point of view. How might one be certain that what she thought was right? Only truth, something that really happened in physical reality is something that may be treated beyond speculation.

King smiled in response. He got the message and he understood the deep wisdom. `Karm Yoga` must be a path in the middle of the river. He thought why `Dev` - his son and worthy heir, was so popular with masses. He was big on knowledge, and communication, but more importantly, he was the "man of actions". Always busy in his own act - a `Karm Yogi`. He would always do what the situation demanded of him. May be `Karm Yoga` is something he naturally enacts. King saw new possibilities taking shape as the next generation of `Dev` and `Krishna` take the reins. He felt satisfied, and the same time he thought `Dev` and `Krishna` must meet. They were the keys to the new realm -  a reality driven by `Karm Yogies`.

Before I leave, I have one more question `Maharishi` - What are your views on `Bhakti Yoga`. 

`Maharishi` knew this question was coming. He was glad he didn't had to compare `Karm Yoga` with `Bhakti Yoga`. He said - `Rajan` (addressing a king with love and affection), `Bhakti Yoga` is still in its infancy. The trend that is out there to sit and chant `mantras` all day long, would soon change. The true emergence of `Bhakti Yoga` would be to take the example of a `Karm Yogi` and acting righteously (as needed by reality without desires) by emulating them in one's own life. The scripture that I was alluding to is not a story of a `Karm Yogi` alone, it was that of a `Bhakti Yogi` too.

With that, king finally made his way, along with three of the `Ashram's` best combat trained `Yogies` and `Krishna` who were quietly listening to the conversation at the doorsteps of `Ashrama`. He was already late for his next meeting...


----

Sun had already gone down as king hurried to the docks. `Maharishi` had suggested many times to have the king spend a night at `Ashram` for finding a return passage at this hour might be difficult. Boats stop plying with the sun set. Little did he know that king had already planned his return. 

As they reached closer to the bank, king could see a single boat. And he got the unmistakable  musky smell as the wind turned a corner towards them. `Satyawati` had asked `Dashraaj's` youngest daughter `Saryu`, who still worked on the boat, to return back home with gold coins for she didn't want to have the gold coins on them as the evening approached. The older sisters were already married in nearby village. `Saryu` offered to stay back though she wanted to be the one to handover Gold to her father. `Satyawati` was sure `Dashraj` must be celebrating the unexpected bounty by now with his undercover `Asura` friends who stayed in the village having received the immunity from `Maharishi`. She told `Saryu` to let `Dashraj` know she might be very late for she had promised the rich farmer a passage back, and she was anyway used to be on the river in nights. It was not the first time `Satyawati` decided to stay back on the waters. Many of such nights she been to the island, alone, rekindling the memories of her days with `Maharishi` and `Krishna`. Her hopes of seeing them again diminished as the time passed. Sometimes, she wondered, if those days actually happened. Ten years was a long time and each day was a battle with herself. She wondered the moment we get everything we ever wanted - in her case beauty, fragrance and success - we immediately start craving for something else. She also noted that her cravings slowed down as the time passed. They were always at the back but she learnt to live with them and now she was probably ready to move on. 

She was quite surprised when she saw the farmer being escorted by three `Yogies`. She already knew he wasn't an ordinary man for no one would gift gold for a boat ride but the fact that he was escorted by `Yogies` meant he was lot more than his appearance. She thought to herself - Who exactly is he? Then she saw a boy walking behind them. His dark complexion mixing with the ensuing darkness of the evening. Her heart skipped a beat for a premonition told her it was `Krishna` - her son.

The older `Yogies` knew her well from their frequent visits to the village and they had taken her boat number of times to cross the river; but `Maharishi` had made sure he and `Krishna` never crossed her path. If this is `Krishna`, why did `Maharishi` send him this time. Is there a message? - She was still wondering when one of the older `Yogi` bowed to her and asked - `Maa` (means mother but this is a standard way for `Yogies` to address older women), are you planning a ride across the river ?

`Satyawati` woke up from her thoughts - Yes `Yogi` - do you all want to go across ?

No `Maa`, only `Maharaaj` would like to go back to his camp on the other side. We are happy to come with you, should you need someone with you on your return. Or we may wait here till you come back. - said the `Yogi`.

That won't be necessary `Yogi`. `Yamuna` is like my mother! I am safer with her than any place on earth - `Satyawati` smiled - btw, you said `Maharaaj`? Of where? - `Satyawati` asked folding her hands.

`Yogi` almost bit his tongue. He didn't realize that `Shantanu` was under cover and the thought that he blew king's cover hit him like a brick. 

`Krishna` quickly understood the situation. He was about to speak but `Shantanu` stopped him with gesture of his right hand. 

`Devi` (a common address for an upper class woman), I am `Shantanu`, king of `Kuru` Kingdom - He said, knowing there was no harm in losing his cover. In fact, he thanked the fate for making it easy to let his true identity be revealed to `Satyawati`. For one he was tired of playing the "hide and seek" through out the day, second he did want `Satyawati` to know who he was. It had be hard to reveal it himself. That would seem as if he was trying  to impress her with his position though he actually wanted to do exactly that.

`Satyawati` didn't know how to react. He had the most powerful king right in font of her and possibly her long separated son too. She remembered the words of `Maharishi` - You will rule the world. 

She almost sat down by the weight of the moment. She had thought about `Maharishi's` words almost every day since she left him and Krishna behind, but she didn't realize the physical truth would be so much bigger, and so abrupt, and shocking. 

`Krishna` moved a step closer and held her hand. Being a child it felt okay for him to hold the hand of a woman almost her mother's age. He didn't know yet he was holding his real mother. 

And who are you `Yogi`, never seen you around - `Satyawati` asked to reconfirm her premonition. 

I am `Krishna` `Maa` - Son of `Maharishi Parāśara` - said Krishna, oblivious to all that had transpired to get to this moment in time.

And who is your mother `Krishna` - `Satyawati` wanted to see if her son knew his own roots. When she saw `Krishna's` face blanking out, she asked - How would you know everything that is there to know without knowing who you are?

A simple question, yet so profound. `Yogies` left the banks as king and `Satyawati` boarded the boat. On his way back, `Krishna` thought why did `Maharishi` never brought the topic of his mother. Why such a simple truth is hidden from humans. Why don't we automatically know our lineage? - our oldest history.

Any other child would have rushed to his father to know who was his mother. But `Krishna` was no ordinary child. That night, `Krishna` climbed his favorite tall tree and sat there. This was his den when difficult questions troubled his child mind. If `Maharishi` sought not to tell this simple thing, there must be a reason. But more importantly does every manifestation hides something? Is Sun and the moon and the mother Earth that we perceive hide something behind the perceivable. If that was true, would it be right to say bigger the manifestation, bigger was the hidden truth? Then what is the biggest manifestation of all? Isn't it the human body itself, that perceives everything? What does this body hides behind it? Is it what `Maharishi` calls `Atma`. He didn't know when he slept, on the tree. Many questions still unanswered but he knew what to ask. And he also knew truth must reveal itself if we asked the right questions. `Maharishi` had told him never to seek answers. Instead, seek the right questions!








