# Recital v/s Writing ..

The craft of reciting `mantras` with an ascetic lifestyle purposed for a singular focus on diction, was called `Naad Yoga`. This `yoga`, like many others, must be practiced with a strict daily routine (`Bramhacharya`). The idea was to tune human body into the skill of understanding, memorizing and chanting, by removing all the external material distractions. On the other hand, the devotion to exploration and research (in chosen faculties) was called `Nyaan Yoga`. The meaning of `Yoga` is to connect with, and to tap into our internal energy. A `Nyaan Yogi` would harness the inner energy in the pursuit of knowledge. A `Naad Yogi` would do the same for the purpose of rendition and expression. Both were complimentary to each other. There was no point in cumulating knowledge if it was of no use to the masses, or couldn't be preserved over generations. Similarly, there was nothing to recite if it didn't carry specific knowledge. Thus, `Naad Yogies` worked in close interaction with `Nyaan Yogies`.  The role of `Vyasa` was of utmost importance in holding these two streams of `Yoga` together. It was like a bridge between knowledge and expression. Hence, a very sought after title and one that needed dexterity in both. In a way `Vyasas` controlled the flow of information — somewhat like the editors of main stream media these days. They decided what must go to public consumption, what could be left in annuls of obscurity. With great power comes the conflict. Some `Rishies` wanted to make their work imperishable by committing it to a text format themselves. But such attempts were doomed, for the written language was not standardized. And writing tools were still in their infancy.

An ascetic lifestyle was important for `Naad Yogies`. A rich host would select a ‘rites administrator’ to perform `Dravya Yazna` on his (or her) behalf because s/he knew the ritual maker didn't want any of the material gains — an assurance that all the blessings would come directly to the host (without any cut). In a way, rites were the market place between humans and their deities where a `Naad Yogi` acted like an intermediary. Humans invested their allegiance, time and money while deities provisioned things they wanted in the return. No one knew for sure if the market place actually worked, but it was a matter of belief, and it worked for those who believed. More than the apparent divine exchange, the arrangement funded the entire ‘knowledge ecosystem’. The rich hosts and the powerful, as patrons, provided enough alms and homage to allow `Yogies` invest their time in spiritual as well as in material research. This primary research led to ground breaking discoveries and insights that influenced at least four major religions — Hinduism, Buddhism, Jainism and Sikhism; along with hundreds of factions that thrive in South Asia and beyond. Not only religion, it also formed the primitive basis of science that includes linguistics, mathematics, cosmology, medicine, surgery, and lot more. It was like the "open source" movement of our time. `Yogies` shared their knowledge free of charge and lived on donations hence collected.

The formalization of rituals ensured the knowledge stayed immutable over the course of passage from one generation to the next. Imagine a world without written word — no books, no libraries and of course no internet. In that world, `Naad Yogies` were the vessels of knowledge. The literal meaning of word `Naad` is a dense voluminous sound produced from the bottom of lungs. `Aacharyas and Shastries` were essentially `Naad Yogies`. Through years of practice and sacrifice, they had learnt to hold life energy in heart (`Anahata`) and throat (`Vishudhi`) `Chakras`[^chakra] — The seat of compassion and expression. And a proof of being distinct from rest of the species. Other species held the life energies in two lower `Chakras` namely — `Swadhishthana` — the `Chakra` of sexuality and `Manipuraka` — the `Chakra` of consumption.  By moving the energy upwards, sometimes also referred to as raising `Kundalini`, `Naad Yogies` separated humanity from animal kingdom, while still being a seeker of peace (and prosperity) for all the species. By bringing life force to throat, `Naad Yogies` perfected the art of repeatable public recital, making it an ‘art of expressions’. If your interest is peaked in what kind of renditions were these, I recommend listening to this one-minute clip of `Shanti Mantra` from `Brahmin` priest Santosh Mudgal [here](https://www.siddhayoga.org/shanti-mantras/om-dyauh-shanti). Notice the stresses on the syllables and over all elocution. `Vaidik` elocution is a complete genre of rendition just like the gospel music in the west. 

**There was no “generally” cherished art of 'writing'.** The primary use of written word was to send telegrams through pigeons. Short, cryptic and perishable.

Some researchers of knowledge — `Nyaan Yogies`, did consider the idea of converting the `Mantras` into text format — even before `Bramh-rishi`, for obvious advantages of durability and portability.  What if all the `Vyasas` died? What if human race met its demise though epidemic, or other extinction level events. The ancient wisdom must be preserved beyond human shelf life. Those questions existed, but without the comfort of a Mac, “writing” was a herculean task! There were some bold attempts. But that was mostly experimental work — half-baked, grammatically obsolete and contextually incoherent. The focus was not on the content. It was on the 'writing apparatus' and to test the claims of “writing” aficionados. The advocacy on the pro-text side was the obvious notion of freedom. And the promise that the divine information could be made accessible to all. Something like the original promise of the internet!

Majority of the `Vyasas and Naad Yogies` didn't believe written word could ever replace the rigor and authenticity of recital. Some beneficiaries of spoken layer, even announced that efforts to ‘jail’ the wisdom into written symbols was downright demonic. Somewhat like central banks' nervousness towards crypto protocols these days! Though writing meant lot more content could be scribed, and passed on to far-flung places; but the act of writing (and reading) wouldn't invoke elemental powers — they thought ! 

How would you send the homage — the ghee, fruits and milk to the deities without proper ritual? — they asked ! 

Somehow, the ritual had gotten more important than the content. On top, writing had no payback whereas chanting meant they could perform the rites for the kings and the rich, in lieu of ‘necessities and niceties’. Rich were mandated to perform rites at least sixteen times through their life span — birth, marriage and death being the major milestone rituals. In addition, every year, they must perform a rite for the peace of their dead — `Shradha`. Kings had even more rituals at their hands. In all, it was a flourishing economy of rituals and ritual makers.  Priests were more important than a family physician ! Kings didn't even take on a simple journey without consulting their spiritual `guru`. The nexus of politics and religion is a vicious cycle. Reciters were turning into the gate keepers of power.

Writing, on the other hand, had no such incentive. There was no kindle book store, no way to barter the text. It did have a promise to democratize the information and that did appeal to some, but such people were few and far. Most felt a commoner had no reason to access the `Vaidik` knowledge without a qualified gate keeper. And most thought the job of a `Vyasa` was eternal — fully protected till the end of humanity. Those who didn't believe in rituals and thus by extension defied the `Vaidik` wisdom were named `Asuras` — a class of outspoken people just short of being a monster (`Rakshsa`).

New rituals were being added left right and center. A new ritual if you want to enter a new home. Another if you bought a horse and a cart. Yet another to start the harvest.  Sages developing distinct artifacts of knowledge `Rishies`, somewhat like PhDs of our times, weren't entirely happy in current arrangement. They were not sure if adding more rituals was the right path forward. People who had attained demonstrable mastery in a specific field or indigenously developed a new area of research `Maharishies`, often got most of the attention from `Vyasas` — the editors. But new `Rishies` often had problems in getting their work ritualized. It was hard to get attention from the chanting community. As such, they had no way to preserve their work other than scribing it themselves.

`Parāśara` understood and appreciated this growing concern among budding `Rishies`. He also noticed the hardships of writing first-hand, when he scribed his own work `Krishi Parāśara` - the first book on agriculture. The work won him a title of `Maharishi` though it cost him better part of his prime. He wanted to invest more time on improving the ‘writing experience’. And he had one more reason for this desire — his first love — Astrology (`Jyotish`). Astrology was something beyond the spoken means — it needed charting various planets and stars that were hard to capture for any purely spoken language. 

> Astrology (`Jyotish`) is the long old ancestor of modern day cosmology. Most people think astrology's secret sauce is somehow foretelling the future through broad predictions that had apply to almost anyone, but astrology was inherently a deep understanding of space and time. Effect of motion of massive celestial bodies in space-time, on our physical reality — our tiny box. Armed with this ultimate spiritual science, they figured how to predict the effect of celestial conditions that might blossom the expression of a specific gene pool in a new born — her traits — with high degree of accuracy. Even today, in India, a priest (`Pandit`) would pictorially draw the state of heavenly bodies at the time of child birth, called `Janmpatri` — a cosmic birth-chart. This document, normally kept as a scroll, details the exact positions of seven main `grahas` (the sun, moon and five main planets), and twenty seven stars `Nakshtras` at the time of birth. It also details the effect of the motion of this system on the subject child's future. Even today, it is an important consideration (in many Hindu families) say to determine the suitable marital match. 
>
>Charting the stars and planets was impossible in spoken word. A proper framework of scribing was a necessity!

An accurate rendition of this skill, by someone who knew the underlying science of Astrology well, was like controlling the “chromosomal dice”. If someone could predict child's future owing to the effect of cosmic alignment at the time of birth — `Janmpatri`; then s/he could reverse engineer the logic to ascertain the best time to conceive a child for a specific target future. Though such a strategy, also meant long wait for the appropriate planetary alignment — sometimes, many generations in the future. **`Krishna Dvaipayana` was one such awaited child**. His birth was planned and predicated by `Maharishi Parāśara` — an astrologer extraordinaire, and very rightly known as the ‘father of Astrology’. His epic book `Brihat Parāśara Hora Shastra` is considered the starting point of Astrology, even today. 

An English translation of this epic work is embedded here below for reference ...

<center>
<iframe src="https://archive.org/embed/BPHSEnglish" width="560" height="384" frameborder="0" webkitallowfullscreen="true" mozallowfullscreen="true" allowfullscreen></iframe>

</center>

`Maharishi Parāśara` was excited at the prospect of organizing the entire wisdom and he believed written text was the only way to pull off such a miraculous thing. He however had no illusions, he knew scribing the knowledge, might take more than a lifetime — that too if one was sure there exists ˝one unique righteous path˝ for all humans. If he was able to ascertain such a path, he must pass on his learning to his son. If his son, building on what he already knew, could further refine (and test) the truth, then that truth must be embedded into every conscious unit as part of the kernel of knowledge. 

It was an ambitious and tall order for next generation — `Maharishi` thought — but that would be a worthy heir for his life's toil. He believed fate blessed him the skill of astrology, to ensure he found such an heir. 

This was the disposition discompose of `Maharishi`, at a time when time-keeping hadn't even evolved! Time was probably measured in terms of ‘generations’ because every generation appeared to get a new version of ‘tiny kernel’. Something that made acceptance of newer convictions lot easier. He, himself, was working hard on many inscription strategies that were promising, but still not ready for the prime time, particularly for his generation subsumed in the magic of spoken words. He thought, it would take a generational shift to gain acceptance for these tools. 

>Even today, we are not beyond “generational shift”. For example, baby boomers were comfortable with their land lines and emails. It took a generation for the internet to take firm hold particularly with smartphones powered by social media. They were happy with their cable TV. Our generation takes streaming video, as a must have commodity. We assume smartphones and streaming is for ever, while the Gen Z and Gen Alpha may wonder how could people block their hands — the most important organs of human body, with smartphones and watch stuff on a tiny five inch screen? They will have implants to let them talk, walk and work simultaneously.  Their reality may seem like a virtual reality to us, just the way our way of life is living in a VR for people three generations back. With every generation, new tools become effortless and universally acceptable.

And it wasn't just the tools — the pen and the paper; he must find ways to wrap a payback method around ‘writing’ to make it a sustainable model. And he must steer this ship safe from the ones with vested interests in existing paradigm of spoken rites, because labeling someone `Asura` was easy for the power-brokers — even for a slight clue for non-compliance. Even today, changing the existing power-structure isn't free from risk. Music labels killed Napster. China banned free internet. Central banks hate Cryptos. The play of power dynamics is to sustain the past while progress demands efficient innovations. 

Bottom line — there was a growing disagreement between `Naad` and `Nyaan Yogies` and the bone of contention was the `text`. But that was not the first concern of `Maharishi` ! His primary focus was to find the true righteous path that when scribed, actually made a difference in ordinary peoples' life.

---

[^chakra]: In `Hath Yoga`, human energy system is said to have seven interference points called `Chakras`. The bottom most `Chakra` is called `Mool-adhara`. Rising from the bottom are `Manipuraka`, `Swadhishthana`, `Anahata`, `Vishudhi`, `Ajna`, and `Sahsrara`. At the time of birth, the energy is situated at the bottom most `Chakra`. During the course of life, just like animals, energy rises to second `Chakra` for procreation and to the third for consumption. Humans have the capabilities to raise energy to fourth and fifth points that enable them to have compassion and communication. These two qualities formulate the knowledge graph and are relevant for `Naad` and `Nyaan Yogies`. Rise of energy beyond this point is possible only through intervention by spiritual `Guru` who uses sixth point `Ajna` to invoke her energy into disciples. A relevant point for the `Bhakti Yogies`. The last point `Sahsrara` is the final destination to invoke `Karm Yoga`.
