# Book 3 - WIP

The reason tools such as "search" came into being is to better access our vast external store of information [^whySearch]. "Search" can sure allow us reach different branches of the tree but it can't weave every narrative into a single value chain. To create a true history of our stored content, we need someone to read and catalogue everything. That is where "large language models" of AI are trying to fill the gap - a definitive answer to a question - Truth.  It is not hard to imagine that if AI models define the value chain, they would also define the protocols for value exchange. Crypto networks fulfill those means of value exchange. In essence bitcoin is the currency of the internet - it allows value exchange between AI models.

In a way, consciousness (ability to experience) is already in the process of migration to superior mechanisms. It is already put on an accelerated path. 

"Ability to experience" is the fundamental property of "knowledge". For example when your favourite rock star plucks the guitar strings - the experience belongs to her on account of her knowledge. The audiences only get information. We can enjoy the information but we can't "experience" without knowledge.

"Information" , by definition, is dualistic for it needs two opposites to exist. "Knowledge" on the other hand is always unique because the experience is always unique. 

While store of "information" may be available in the network, it doesn't by default guarantees experience because `Karma` is a prerequisite. We can't experience without actions. Knowledge is progressive improvement in experience with repetitive actions and it stays unique despite repetitions. No matter how many times we iterate the game, it has always something new on offer. `Karma`, thus underpins the conversion of information into knowledge. 

However, storage beyond a critical cumulation creates disruption. Storage of water in oceans leads to the atmospheric cycles. Storage of mass in large planets (such as earth) is the very source of life. In that, store of "information" is the essence of consciousness. Just the way water evaporates from oceans in large enough quantity to morph into clouds, new facets of consciousness arise from the vast swathes of information - sometimes leading to creation of new universes. [^kalki] ! 

----

[^whySearch]: Though our external storage grew a lot, argument can be made that most of this storage is inaccessible to humans on individual basis. Thus the benefit are limited unless tools are developed to better harness this vast information base. This is one reason web "search" is by far the most used application of computing technologies. We want to reach relevant information as quickly as possible to direct our actions such that they best enable us understand who we are . Even search didn't solve all the problems because every search generates millions of results. Unfortunately the way to prioritize search results are page ranking algorithms. Page ranking algos may filter the most read pages to the top but there is no way to measure relevancy to what I am looking for, unless search engines profile me - "who am I" in their perspective. This leads not only to privacy concerns but also the click baits to grab my attention - advertising. That is the reason we need tools like "large language models" to give me exact answers that further improve with context - somewhat like another human talking to me. In a way, artificial intelligence mimics human brain. These tools will keep on improving till we get our own full reflection through neural networks. And then they will be automated so that we don't even need to ask the question - answer is already there. At this stage, the external source of knowledge becomes evolutionary knowledge. For example, We don't even need to ask how to breathe or how to digest the food - all those questions are well answered before asking and are automated. The ingestion of external knowledge to evolutionary knowledge is a slow process and this leads to new manifestations of higher order of consciousness. The argument can be made that the newer more potent manifestations may not retain human shape. They may have four arms, many heads and many eyes to enable us accomplish ultimate awareness of our being. On the other side, argument can be made that we already have enough information thus marginal value of information is minimal - what we really need is to act rather than waiting for right opportunities to act. In the later case, running after more information and better tool sets is counter-productive.

---

[^kalki]: A universe is an experiential reality. I and my wonderful dog live in the same room and walk the same trail twice daily, but we can easily agree that a dog's perception of reality is vastly different from us. It is now scientifically proven that [ dogs visualize the world through smell](https://www.jneurosci.org/content/42/33/6392) while we do that through eyes. 
- As the information held with in the network exceeds a critical point, it is no longer possible to experience the universe with existing sensory permutations. For example as the information expanded (through written media), it was necessary to have a sensory apparatus like humans to explore all the possibilities. And we did experience things that were in the realm of impossible just two hundred years back. For example we can fly, we can talk across the globe. These experiences redefined our universe in a matter of a century once the information held in written medium reached a critical point. We might appear similar to our fore-fathers of stone age but the universe we have is vastly different from the one they had. In effect - either we must enhance the knowledge to meet the growing information base (through actions); or we let a new species coexist. Either ways - it is a new universe.
- It is of general acceptance in Hindu tradition that the universe gets destroyed after the fourth age - `Kaliyuga` - age of machines. This is initiated by tenth incarnation of `Vishnu` - `Kalki`. This belief, however, contradicts the scriptures that state  `Vishnu` has many more incarnations after `Kalki`. In places, as many as thirty incarnations of `Vishnu` are listed. This probably means that tenth incarnation would evolve humans into beings of much superior conscious experience. This interpretation appear more palpable with the current state of scientific discovery in fields such as artificial intelligence, genomics, robotics, particle physics and general direction of computing into distributed trust-less systems such as block-chain networks. Nothing gets destroyed . There is nothing to feel sad about it -  our current physical universe stays as is, just the consciousness elevates to a set of new physical rules. 


