On the surface, it appears that the contest is between the "old" and the "new". The old seeking to maintain a status quo while the new aspiring for better. But the truth is old loves the new like it's own future. And the new knows the old as a dependable trustee. The shift, however, must happen, and it needs a trigger - something unwarranted -  a mishap to break the umbilical chord. Bigger the shift, bigger the mishap.

In a way, the "mishap" marks the beginning of the "transition". It is a gun shot to initialize the race. The battle begins at this moment between many possibilities of the "new". In fact, many new possibilities crop up to honor the ensuing opportunity. Having recognized the inevitable, they all seek their claim to the throne. This happens over and over again as in "history repeats itself". There are many examples [^history] in our recent history. They occur for the evolution must drive the "change" - it is the evolutionary trough - a step back before the breeding innovations get unleashed. Such triggers, driven by imperceptible forces of evolution are said to be caused by `Prarbdha`. 

`Prarbdha`, a `Sanskrit` word, means something that has already commenced or begun. In that sense it also means "fate" because the fate had already commenced before the material action physically showed up, and condensed into a mishap...

# `Prarbdha`...

Seven months before `Parāśara's` birth, `Bramhrishi Vaśiṣṭha` — his grand father — woke up to a grotesque morning. His sprawling congregation (`Ashrama`), on the banks of river `Yamuna`,  sank into deepest of grief, and rage. His son `Śakti Muni` was killed by a self-proclaimed tribal king. Some religious accounts say `Bramh-Rishi` had one hundred sons taken that fateful morning of mass-murder. They probably mean `Bramh-rishi` treated all his close followers, particularly the faculty members, as his true-born!

The epitome of India's contemporary knowledge hubs, `Mathura`, was in free blood-bath. In today's parlance, it would be as if someone killed en-masse at Google campus. Hundreds of knowledge bearers left dead. Not even their wives spared. Even children didn't get a plea for mercy. 

Only `Bramh-rishi` himself, and wife of `Śakti Muni - Adrushyanti`, survived the massacre. She was carrying yet to be born `Parāśara` — maybe two months into her pregnancy. The young widow couldn't even announce her motherhood before the curse gripped the congregation. A dark night swept her massive wings across the main city and adjoining villages. A part of `Bramhrishi` saw himself at the epicenter of such ill eruption. He couldn't help thinking he must have incurred a foundational error to warrant such a backlash, from the very people he was trying to salvage!

Saddened to the core, and unaware that the young widow was carrying, `Vaśiṣṭha` tried to end his life. He miraculously survived multiple attempts. Probably Gods wanted to extend his life to ensure unborn `Parāśara` got a chance at life. 

And more importantly, to save humanity from the loss of the 'knowledge' that was locked in `Bramh-rishi's` mind, **for there was no written text.**

## 1.1
---

If we think of  modern civilization a premium car, then what `Vaśiṣṭha` had conceived [^whoIsVas] was ‘literally’ the wheels - the rudimentary knowledge — agriculture, mining, metallurgy, transport, to name a few — down to the very meaning of the five elements. Pieces of entire wisdom were sharded in the collective memory of the congregation. Only `Vaśiṣṭha` knew it all. His mind was the only ‘full back up’ of this budding 'external store of knowledge’. 

If it took us say five thousand years from the wheel to a car, it had probably taken fifty thousand [^50k], to evolve the ‘wheels’, for knowledge is never a straight line. It is a curve that curls up exponentially with time. Had `Vaśiṣṭha` died, the nascent civilization could have gone back into stone ages, and quite possibly perished into a dark future, for success against cruel forces of nature was a bleak chance — one in a trillion — may be even less. The trajectory of rise of consciousness is contingent upon the discoveries, and the inventors who built on each other's work. Think of it as a pyramid — upside down. At some point in the past, this inverse pyramid meets the primordial jungle — just a single hinge on which a vast civilization must balance. `Bramh-rishi Vaśiṣṭha` was that underpin.

 Survival was not a question here! Even animals ‘survived’ to this date! At stake was ‘our first civilized world’ — driven by an external store of knowledge -  a group of dedicated sages who remembered all the important discoveries, through daily recital. They were the nodes of this knowledge network. Their goal was to catalog the fundamental principles of civilization so that humans get a shot at the deeper mysteries of the universe - beyond mere survival. We are obviously not there yet, but we now have an immensely distributed and fault tolerant network to allow us make an attempt. At least a guarantee that our external store of knowledge shall stay unharmed, as long as a part of earth survived. Our "text" based knowledge store (books, code, history on block-chain networks) is protected while we adapt ourselves into higher orders of conscious experience.
## 1.2
---

 The potency to build such a distributed network - the underlying protocol that enables this 'network of knowledge', is not unique to humans. Holding the knowledge in a network of manifested beings - living or non-living is a core potency of nature what we refer to as `Bramh` in `Vaidik` science. For example, Mycorrhizal [^mycorr] network – a vast underground network of fungal linkages that connect trees to one another is a knowledge network. This network controls, among other things, that even wild growth in jungle is well spaced to get enough nourishment for all the different species of plants fighting for the sunlight and minerals. It is an expression of `Bramh`.

 In essence,`Bramh` is the bearer of the evolutionary knowledge. `Bramh` binds a cell with another with knowledge of existential purpose, a star with another, even an atom to an atom. It is the knowledge that turns billions of cells together into a limb; an infinite cluster of stars into a galaxy. It is the knowledge that lives in union of atoms to turn them into elements of periodic table. `Vaśiṣṭha` was called `Bramh-rishi` because he first understood this natural phenomenon and applied it to knowledge storage beyond evolutionary mechanism. In a way, he discovered the first "battery" for storing knowledge - to target it for a "purpose" in an accelerated fashion. He distributed important discoveries among his disciples and had them remember finer details through daily recital - to perpetuate the knowledge externally from one generation to the next. He saw this ability as a kind grace, as if he inherited it from all-pervading `Bramh`. 

He was probably aware he was tinkering with a core protocol [^protocol] of nature. Instead of letting knowledge evolve at a snail pace, he was putting the "evolution" in an express lane; but he chose this lane with humility. His objective was not to use this battery of knowledge for personal leverage. He wanted to share the benefits with all -  not only humans but all living beings. However, the attack on the congregation raised doubts in his mind. They made him question his own integrity - Is this path correct? Is altering the course of nature righteous? A question that may haunt modern architects of artificial intelligence as much as those spearheading the gene editing tools! Are we disturbing the natural equilibrium? 

> He got the answer only when multiple suicide attempts were rejected. In a way "God" himself paved his path. Over time, `Bramhrishi` put this attack behind him. A mishap - he thought- was the law of nature - `Prarbdha`. 

He rebuilt the congregation ground up and brought his focus to newborn `Parasara`. He had only one "take-away" from the incident - there must be a fallback option in case such a disaster struck again. Writing the scriptures was one such option but how could someone scribe vast knowledge on temple walls and what if someone burnt the temples!

The pen and the ink was still couple generations in the future ..
## 1.3
---
Such a gory attack on the humble keepers of the primitive knowledge would obviously beg two questions — Why and When ! Why would anyone have a problem with someone trying to build a new civilization for greater good. We know most nation states have issues with crypto-currencies because they have genuine vested interest in their "Fiats", but what could be vested for those who were anyway living off the jungle?

As far as the ‘why’ is concerned — there is a good answer. The congregation was rich. The legend says `Bramh-rishi` had a magical cow (`Kaam Dhenu`) that gave him everything he asked for — on demand. The obvious truth is, magical cow was the ‘Knowledge’. Knowledge attracts wealth — be it Apple, or be it Google of our times, or the `Ashramas` of the past, the source of wealth has always been the accumulated knowledge. `Vaśiṣṭha's Ashram` was by far the biggest research institute of that time. They were the keepers of inheritance from `Bramh`. Many jealous eyes were set on the plush ‘wealth and peace’ of the congregation — material as well as intellectual.

As regards to ‘when’, unfortunately, we don't have a date or a year. The broad consensus among historians is a wide range -  between three to five thousand years, before Christ. How come 'keepers of knowledge' forgot to mention a date? It had be rather presumptuous (on our part) to quickly conclude there was no time-keeping in those days. In `Mahabharata`, `Dwaipayana` did write the duration of four ages; then how come there was no date on the first document! Or the spoken words that preceded the scribing attempts?

The rational answer seems a bit more nuanced. 

Probably, in that world, before the written word, when only way to sustain knowledge was to memorize it, last thing anyone cared was the ‘metadata’ — such as date, or time. Even the names of the primal inventors who kick started the civilization are unknown. No one knows who solved the hard problems of those early days — how to start a fire? — how to preserve the seeds? — how to use rivers for transport? — how to attach  horse(power) to a loaded cart? These solutions evolved over thousands of years and were passed on from one generation to the next through the word of mouth. The sense of time was probably lost in the slow pace of iterative innovations of that first civilization. Thankfully, `Vaśiṣṭha` family preserved these key discoveries through recital. 

>It, however, didn't mean ‘no credit’ was given to the early inventors. Instead of mentioning every individual name, they were tagged to a group. One distinct group for a specific area of exploration, to express gratitude. For example, all those who contributed in water works, irrigation, and agriculture were represented by a single entity `Indra`. All those who invented fire and various ways to control it — who contributed from mining to metallurgy; were named `Agni`. Those who tamed the winds, to build the early sail boats were called `Varuna`. These group entities, represented by respective common name, were called ‘deities’. They were worshipped for the blessings they bestowed on humanity and thus by extension on all the species.
>
>Using a pseudonym to identify a group is common even today. Instead of counting thousands of hardware and software experts, we simply say "Apple" makes iPhone. The phenomenon goes beyond technology or business. We normally say `Mahatma Gandhi` got India freedom. What we actually mean by this generalization is thousands of freedom fighters who worked with `Mahatma` got India freedom. Instead of counting the names of thousands of activists who worked in "civil rights movement", we simply use the name of Dr King to express our gratitude. Satoshi Nakamoto is a pseudonym for the person(s) who white-papered the Bitcoin Protocol.

There was a good  reason to purge the superfluous information. Without the facility to scribe, the average human memory offered limited storage. The focus was on keeping the "knowledge" fresh and compact, instead of maintaining the meta-data or the version history. The knowledge was important because it was  our distinction from the rest of the species. More importantly, "knowledge" was deemed only path to liberation from the miseries of hard life. The goal was to probably equip as many human minds with the latest findings as possible, rather than copyright protection or allocating laurels on individual basis. That could be the reason that every scripture pays homage to it's deities right in the invocation, and then quickly gets down to it's construct.

Also, the knowledge must be kept as compressed as possible to render it real-time. In that verbal world, only that knowledge carried forward that was put to use every day such as survival skills, or was (forcefully) recited on daily basis. Thus, we don't know the exact date but we know for sure that the piece of eternal code rests archived in our foundations. And the fact we succeeded to tame the forces of nature, and that we built increasingly complex systems of money, security, computing, and health etc; is a testament that our core kernel is flawless — as if it is a gift of the deities - their legacy.
## 1.4
---

The other reason seems to be embedded in the culture. `Adhyatma` - study of self, was the keyword. The culture sought internal peace rather than external prosperity. The primary question was "who am I?" rather than "what is this universe?". The "God" was nothing but the supreme knowledge of self in "unmanifested" `Avyakta` state. The work for knowledge was deemed work of the God. 

This culture was based on a symbiotic framework of belief and inquiry - a belief based model that explained manifestation, expanse, evolution, and governance; from atomic to the universal scales; and placed human endeavours as part of the divine equilibrium. "Science" was the discovery of the ways "God" worked! The accuracy of this belief system isn't as important as the fact that it was easy to comprehend and everyone subscribed to the idea.  Amazing thing is as we are getting to the deeper layers with modern science, `Vaidik` belief system seems to tread close [^vaidikScience] with particle physics, Darwin's evolution as well as information theory. Maybe all paths lead to a singular truth!

 While deities represented the beautiful complexity of our civilization (through real life experiments), they did so (as believed) atop pulpit of three core competencies, collectively referenced as potencies of unmanifested supreme. As a practical implication, in `Vaidik` science, "God" is nothing but these three potencies of "knowledge". 

> These three potencies exist to answer the profound question - who am I? It was believed, "Knowledge" in it's unmanifested form, though at eternal peace, must manifest to answer this fundamental question - who am I? Because "observance" is possible only for those that have a physical shape. Thus primary drive of all manifested beings is to find who they are - `Adhyatma` - study of self. Knowledge manifests, governs and decays the manifested beings through it's eightfold basic nature - `Ashtadhamool Prakriti` [^mool]. And must it evolve till it gets to the answer. In that ladder of evolution, humans were considered the crown jewels of nature!

Here is a brief description of these three potencies: 

- **Potency of manifestation** - manifestation of knowledge into beings of progressively higher consciousness, represented by `Vishnu`. Think of `Vishnu` as a set of all the possibilities for all the conceivable states at any stage of evolution. `Vishnu` is thus embodiment of "One" supreme knowledge, and hence all his manifestations (including humans) inherit a complete copy of the knowledge; though they express only a tiny aspect based on the state and the stage of evolution. As soon as a "form" is manifested, it seeks a fundamental question - who am I? The answer is provided by `Bramh`.
- **Potency of reflection** - a vast network of manifested entities known as `Bramh`, to retain the decrypted knowledge . With increase in manifested nodes, the expression of knowledge splits into ever increasing granularity. These discrete expressions are held in the relationships of manifested entities. For example a woman is a mother to a son, a wife to a husband and a daughter to a father - these three relationships hold three expressions of knowledge. Thus the woman may say that she is a sum of all the answers - a mother, a sister and a wife; and a combination of thousands of other relationships with animate and inanimate things. ***In essence the `Bramh` is a universal mirror***. Every connection holds a tiny piece of knowledge to answer the basic question of `Vishnu's` manifestation - who am I? Thus `Bramh` is the spread of `Vishnu`. As more synapses get added, the weights on remaining part of network adjust automatically, such that "knowledge" held (in each relationship) becomes more granular. "Knowledge" is still "ONE", though it is expressed through infinitely many more relationships. The reason `Vishnu` evolves to ever higher level of consciousness is to find one that may answer the primordial question of unmanifested "knowledge". 
- **Potency of discretion** - Though `Vishnu` has infinite possibilities, only one of them is observable at a specific node of the evolving network. Rest all are discarded by the power of discretion represented by `Siva`. In essence `Siva` represents the zenith of consciousness. One that governs the entire system for a meaningful rendering such that there must exist a parity symmetry. The parity symmetry (mirror image) allows manifestations to ask the basic question - who am I? Think of `Siva` as the automated system governance that does the sanity check for parity symmetry at the run time. Not only it makes sure that the `Bramh` is a universal mirror, it also acts as a reductive force to decay all those improbable manifestations that could be made more granular. In other words , `Siva` ensures there is only one universe contained within it's own universal reflection  - all the parallel possibilities are discarded to bind manifestation to it's very purpose. At the most fundamental level, as a manifester-observer mirror [^mirror], `Vishnu` and `Siva` also represent the fundamental duality of nature (`Ardh-narishwar`). And since `Siva` is the reductive [^decay] force, to attain most granular (stable) universe; it is synonymous to the "rise of consciousness". A being of higher consciousness can perceive more granularity though with increasing granularity answering the basic question (who am I?) gets more nuanced!

 These core competencies are scale-invariant. They exist unchanged from sub-atomic particles to the galactic depths of cosmos. But the complexity of our civilization exists only at human scales, thanks to the intelligent discoveries of groups of inventors, represented separately by respective deities. 

 The framework (of core potencies and deities) acted as a  happy marriage between faith and scientific inquiry. The evolution and expansion of universe (and particularly of the bio-verse) was considered a means to decrypt the parts of "One" knowledge. The decryption was facilitated by scientific endeavours, formulated (and constantly improved) by deities.  The notion of awakening (or the light) was the state of fully decrypted ‘knowledge’; and that of sleep (or the darkness), was being completely oblivious. The `Vaidik` invocation `Tamso Mam Jyotir Gamay` means — take me from my existing darkness to the light! Thus `Vaidik` way of life is same as the path of scientific discovery of our time. There is no friction whatsoever, but it invokes a spiritual sense of surrender, and respect for the core mechanisms of nature, that are beyond human control. In essence, the question is NOT - "what is this universe?" (as sought by modern science), the question is - "who am I?" because the entire universe around me is my own reflection. If I get to know myself, I readily know the entire universe.

 While material discovery and faith thrived in co-existence, the framework of Knowledge and it's potencies was considered eternal and omni-present. Such being the case, putting a date or a name on the realization of a tiny piece of knowledge was anyway quite meaningless. This approach culminated the idea of sacrificing every accomplishment to the potencies of the supreme knowledge. Science became sacred. Spirituality was a way of life. Even human life, being a manifested entity,  was considered a gift of three potencies. Taking an ownership view in terms of attaching a revelation to one's own name was felt awkward and lustful. If there is no name, then there is obviously no date. In essence, doing good anonymously became the culture and time-keeping never made to the list of priorities - even for the mishaps.

## 1.5
 ---

Before the ‘written word’ became the mainstream mechanism to preserve literature, scriptures were passed on as `Shruti`[^shutri] — the spoken word. A choir of reciters chanted the hymns (`Richas and Mantras`) whole day long — from the early morning to the late evening. Certain `mantras` must be recited at a specific time of the day, and at a specific place. Some of them must be performed in front of the holy fire — rites. Teachers (`Aacharyas`), a level-above the reciting students, helped them get the pronunciation right, and to attune a `Vaidik` elocution style. And finally, the editors (`Vyasas`) were responsible for the content. `Vyasas` were there to make sure the spoken content stayed current, accurate, and in exact line with the messages of sages. Their stated objective was to keep the knowledge distributed over as many human minds as feasible — a block chain of knowledge, distributed over biological nodes. `Vyasas` ran carefully designed distribution and consensus protocols.

And there was a good reason for intense focus on recital. Memories couldn't be stolen! Even today, we are advised to memorize our passwords! No one even imagined the scenario of such a nihilistic attack on `Vaśiṣṭha` congregation. No one had provisioned redundancy at the network level. The attack was on the ‘external store of knowledge’ — on `Kaam dhenu` — the modern ways of civil life that provisioned everything for everyone. The `mantra` was `Sarve Bhavantu Sukhinha` — peace and prosperity to one and all. Not for the kings or the rich alone, or the strong — for everyone, including minor species. This knowledge created a new  ‘human fork’ in otherwise old  ‘planet of apes’. And the attackers were the Apes (`Rakshsas`) [^rakshsa], who didn't want to subscribe to the idea of a systemic change in human approach to civilization — a pragmatic view of governance for equity — from “survival of the fittest” to “well-being of all”!

## Research and notes:
----

[^history]: Evolutionary troughs of current history - examples:
- IBM was the old. Microsoft and Apple battled for superiority in computing as contenders for new leadership title. For the observes in late 80s it appeared as if big blue is fighting Apple (and later Microsoft) but that was just a trigger. The fact that biggest tech company of that time got rattled by the new paradigm in personal computing was a trigger for Microsoft and Apple to take point on each other.
- Laptop was old, the new comers iOS and Android are battling for superiority in mobile computing. For quite sometime it felt like mobile devices were the PC killers but the truth is battle is never between the old and the new. It is always amongst many new contenders. 
- It appears as if Internal combustion engine is at odds with the EVs or the hydrogen fuel cells. Though the truth is fossil fuel industry will be the biggest investors in sustainable future in times to come because they know first hand about the shift. Sustainable energy is the opportunity for OPEC and Refiners because someone needs to do the work and they are best positioned to take advantage of this massive opportunity. The real battle is among EV brands - Tesla , Rivian , NIO and hundreds more who throw their hats in this race. I guess Apple will soon launch a car. Google will have another Android business model to empower all the traditional players with it's EV and FSD platforms.
- Fiat currencies are old. It appears that cryptos are fighting with Fiats. But that is not true. The real battle is with in Cryptos - BTC vs Ether vs Sol vs so many other possibilities. When the dust settles, we will see that Fiats have their own role to play just like laptop has it's own role in the increasingly mobile world though the primary reserve will shift to one of the cryptos that emerges victor in this new battle of the century. Nation states have an important choice to make at this juncture - Try to kill crypto and embrace a finacinal obsolescence or welcome the future and align themselves with the potential winner.
---

[^whoIsVas]: The notion of invention at that time was different. Most religious accounts say that `Vaśiṣṭha` lived for more than a thousand years. It seems that `Vaśiṣṭha` was a family title rather than being an individual. A family that was responsible for remembering all that was ever invented. The knowledge was passed on generation by generation — from parents to offspring. Each generation dedicated to a sole purpose of synthesizing and cumulating the knowledge of all the basic discoveries of their time. They imparted parts of this knowledge to the followers based on their capabilities. Over a long period of many generations, the group of followers increased and turned into a community. Most of the followers spread geographically and many co-located in the `Ashrama`.

---

[^50k]: Wheel of time ..
- From our vantage, we think invention of a 'wheel' (or controlled fire) as a specific event long back. However, the truth is every innovation that gets a global acceptance, must go through a vast rigor of effort and time. For example the migration from a magnetic tape to DVD, took a while. Migration from fossil fuels to renewanbles, though a very common sense solution to a major crisis, may take many decades. The struggle to get to a better option always exists. This is a never ending war and the outcome is superior consciousness.  It was there when we decided to move to internet from legacy communication, when we chose digital over paper and it remains in a choice between fiat verses crypto currencies. 
- As we get to higher levels of consciousness, it takes less time to make a consensus decision on account of much superior communication. Acceptance of wheel at a global level verses bipedal (or four-legged) approach to mobility must have taken thousands of years. 
- We are now, reaching that almost vertical segment of the curve. The rate of change with respect to our perceived time is tending fast towards infinity. The world will soon start changing upside down on weekly, daily and hourly  basis. In `Hindu` scriptures this time is called `Kali-yuga` - the age of automation. At the end of this age, automation gets so refined that reality may be altered instantaneously with mere thought. As the curve becomes vertical, a new physical universe gets created because the current laws of physics can't accommodate such a rate of change. You may say laws of physics are fixed but that is not true. For example, immediately after the big bang, our computations indicate that  the universe expanded much faster than the speed of light.
- The [infaltionary epoch](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inflation_(cosmology)) must have taken trillions of years when it happened, but to us it is a tiny fraction of a trillionth of a second - because we are at such a higher level of consciouness that the superlong "creation" appears a split second to us. But we are not the last evolution of consciousness, neither is this the final shape of our physical universe.  The laws of physics must evolve to support evolving conciousness. The migration to a new physical universe is triggered  by tenth incarnation of `Vishnu` - `Kalki Avataar`.


---


[^mycorr]: Mycorrhizae literally means “fungus-root” and is the symbiotic relationship between a fungus and a tree’s roots. [reference](https://mothertreeproject.org/glossary#mycorrhizal-network)


----
[^protocol]: Evolutionary knowledge v/s external store of knowledge in computer lingo
- In computer networking, there are two important protocols - TCP/IP and Gossip. TCP/IP is like the external store of knowledge. It implements a client server model where a client requests information from a server. It is an organised way to store and distribute knowledge. The internet runs on this model.
- The Gossip protocol, on the other hand works on evolutionary principles. It runs without a central server and works based on probabilistic model to spread knowledge randomly. Gossip is used in highly available and fault tolerant systems such as Cassandra. This is a great protocol for infecting a large population of decentralized nodes. For this reason, it is also called epidemic protocol. A curious application of this protocol is bit coin mining with 'proof of work' consensus algorithm. Another great use-case is [hashgraph](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hashgraph) deployed for [absolute byzentine](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Byzantine_fault) proof.

---


[^vaidikScience]: The standadrd model of particle physics, beleives that smallest of the mass bering particles are quarks. Quantum chromodynamics (QCD) postulates that the quarks are made of three colors Red, Blue and Green - akin to three potencies of knowledge as believed in `Vaidik` science. Each of the manifested quarks has all these three colors and hence they are colorless (a combination of Red Blue and Green being transparent or white). QCD beleives that the nothing may manifest into massive particles unless they are color neutal. Thus `Vishnu`, `Bramh` and `Siva` exist in all manifested things and thus in all the systems made of manifested things. Color neutalness is a mandatory requirement of massive particles just as existence of `Vishnu`, `Bramh` and `Siva` is a mandatory requirement for creation in `Vaidik` Science. 

---

[^mool]: In QCD, the three colors (along with their anti-colors), interct through and are the basis of fundamental force of manifestation known as "Strong Force". Strong foce is mediated by particles known as "Gluons". There are eight different types of Gluons just the way `Vaidik` science beilves eight fold nature of interaction `Ashtdhamool Prakriti` of three basic potencies. 

----

[^mirror]: In particle physics all mass carrying particles must have a spin 1/2. They are said to follow Fermi-Dirac statistic. The idea of spin 1/2 is somwehat confusing. It means that a manifested particle gets back to its (original) state after two complete circles (rotation of 720 degrees). It is difficult to imagine such a particle in our day to day life except if we use a (rather crude) mirror analogy. If we assume I and my mirror image are one system, then for every full rotation my mirror image also gets a full rotation. In essence the system got a 720 degree rotation. This is the reason, all mass-ful particles must have their image born with them - these images are called anti-particles. Thus nature of basic manifestation (formation of mass from energy)  is to show up in particle - anti particle pair. In a way , an anti-particle is an anwer to a fundamental question of all manifested things - who am I? `Vishnu` and `Siva` represent this fundamental duality. The duality applies to not only to quarks but to three basic colors as well. Thus we have anti-Red, anti-Blue, anti-Green in QCD. Eight type of Gluons, however, don't have duality since they have spin 1 (not 1/2) - and hence they are massless. In essence, gluons represent a force (strong force), while colors and quarks represent mass. As a parallel in `Vaidik` science , `Vishnu` , `Bramh` and `Siva` collectively represent manifestation while eightfold nature `Ashtdhamool Prakriti` represents the force of creation.


---

[^decay]: In particle physics, the particles of unstable mass decay into stable particles through a process called "Beta decay". The decay arises out of a fundamental force of nature called weak force. As you might have guessed, the process of decay is quite the opposite of manifestation in the sense, "parity" (spin 1/2) is enforced in manifestation while "parity" is taken away during the decay. Nutrinos are released during the decay. Nutrinos are the only manifested particles that don't have a mirror image. Or to put it more succiently, the laws of physics don't care if it is a particle or an anti particle ( a particle or it's mirror image) but for Neutrinos. For Neutrinos , you can tell if it is particle itself or if it is a mirror image. This breaking of "parity symmetry" leads to decay. The decay continues till it attains "parity symmetry" at a lower mass (lower energy level) means more granularity.

---

[^shutri]: `Shruti` meant the spoken word when the humans used to sustain knowledge, only in the vocal format. Maybe because scribing was difficult. With the advent of writing tools, many `Shruties` were scribed. In essence the scriptures were born out of `Shruties`. The words that got written down, entered the collective memory of humanity.  Such written down early scriptures were called `Smrities`. For example `Manu Smriti` is among the oldest written down scripture, trans-encoded from `Shruti` to `Smriti`. The Sanskrit word `Shruti` got deformed into `Shutri` in Hindi with passage of time. It is important to bear in mind that every thing that we talk (chatter) is NOT `Shruti`. `Shruties` were consciously identified pieces of wisdom, preserved through formal recital to enable passage of knowledge from one generation to the next.

---

[^rakshsa]: `Rakshsas` were humans who believed in animalistic behavior. They thought, only way to survive in this jungle was to have more strength than predators. Thus, by natural selection, they grew larger limbs and stronger muscles. They could be as tall as say ten feet. They could uproot the trees with their hands. At the same time, their brains remained small, just like animals. Most of them thought the idea of survival with a smarter brain was at best 'funny'. Some of them also thought that the knowledge driven people who were trying to build a civil society were easy targets.
- The literal meaning of the word `Rakshsa` is the one who provides protection (`Raksha`). Thus not only the protection provider needed to be big and strong, the fabric of the society was built on the idea that there must be someone to protect - a police state. The `Vaidik` ideas were the ideas of freedom in which the only protector were the `Deities` (those who accomplished discoveries) or the three potencies of the knowledge. Thus there was a natural tension of ideologies.
) 
---
