Back in her tinsel town, the fairy couldn't help share the experience of last evening with her friends. Most of them had their own tales to share - about the crazy things humans do. They basically downplayed her experience as naive because this was probably the first time she broke the law.  Some of them insisted she should not have given the option to the man for she knew what was better for him. They probably wanted her down the guilt trip for not being of use to people who needed her help - there is always a good excuse for not doing anything - they meant. Only one of them pondered about `Matsya` - What happened to her? Who was her child ? And most importantly - did `Maharishi` ditch her after he got what he wanted!

Luckily, that evening, both of them caught hold of the Wizard Angel at a social mixer. The conversation started at an odd note. How did `Matsya` conceive a child just at a sprinkle of water? Is there something more to be read between the lines ? - They asked the wizard smilingly. 

Unaware that that the story had already leaked into the "social circles", Wizard was taken aback. He wanted to cover up the story. He was more concerned if the matter reached the flight controllers. But few martinis later, he too jumped in the details. And particularly because the focus was not on the man who didn't take his deal. It was on the story that was anyway so dear to him. 

What exactly is the birth ? - He asked both of them. Seeing their faces blank out - Let's go outside for it's too noisy in here. We need a quieter place to talk - he suggested with a smile.

As they stepped outside the crowded hall, the light drizzle had just stopped. And a thick rainbow had lit up the evening sky. All three of them, holding their glasses took a deep breath of the clean air that was restored after enormous efforts of the angle scientists and the humane activists. The Wizard looked at the rainbow. Marveling at the beauty of the nature and disclaiming that despite all their progress, there was still much unknown, he started his monologue.

There are three basic colors - Red, Blue and Green. They may mix up to make trillions of colors though our eye are limited to around ten million. Possibilities are endless but four new colors are rather stable - Orange, Yellow, Indigo and Violet. Together with three basic, the seven colors are, as we all know, the colors of a rainbow. They are normally hidden in one "White" but they reveal themselves when elements meet - after the rain when the sun shows up - the suspended droplets light up the washed air. As if there is a different backdrop of space below what normally meets the untrained eyes - the darkness. The cosmos shows up it's true colors and beautiful they are! Aren't they? - He paused to check if he made sense, and also to make sure he was not overtly poetical. Seeing them both share the pleasant observation, he continued ..

They also hold the clues to the very nature of creation .. The "birth" as we normally call it.

Each of these seven colors is an orientation of information - a statement of existence. An Indigo is a signal that all the other six colors left it alone - a separation occurred. What color is that combination of six (trillion) that we don't see below the shining Indigo? Let's just call it the inverse of Indigo or "Anti-Indigo" for all those probably colors conspired against poor Indigo.   He smiled and continued - So Yellow is of course Yellow, but let's say the absence of Yellow is "Anti-Yellow" - all the remaining colors (as a single shade) except Yellow . 

For us to perceive a color, its anti-color must separate. Let it sink in for a bit :-) - said he as he gulped the last ounce from his tumbler.

It was time for the fairy to reflect - Conscious perception is in the separation. A magnet only personifies the idea though this tenet is applicable to everything we observe or even feel.  Even abstract things like great riches have their inverse in extreme poverty.  Love - hate, care - indifference,  and respect - impudence;  all abstract emotions manifest in the separation.

Exactly - said the wizard - Now here is what they didn't teach in the courses we took - kinda secret that is still kept in the wraps. His voice lowered as if he was sharing a deep insight - In this separation, something potent gets locked in. We can't perceive this "locked-in" knowledge except that it appears Yellow, or Red or Green as the case may be. 

He continued after making sure the curiosity of both his listeners - The knowledge that is locked-in is complete in itself but in this case the expression is a specific color - Just like in case of a rock the conscious expression is ..well ..that of a rock. In case of a lion, it is a man eating beast; in case of tree it is the fruits and the shade. Our conscious experience may interpret the locked knowledge in infinite different ways because the knowledge is always complete. A full copy is distributed in every animate and inanimate expression - from a super massive blackhole to a puny quark - a distributed ledger of immense proportion if you humor the block-chain technology. 

He paused only to restart immediately to drive home the point - The curious question then is what happens when Yellow meets anti-Yellow ? Does it maketh the White or does it make the Black? 

The friend, who had recently been to "Abstract Algebra" jumped in now - group operation under addition dictates that a color and it's anti-color put together must give rise to the "white".  Simply because anti-color is "white" minus the color we see. 

You nailed it - said the wizard - In fact any color mixed with it's anti-color should give us the white light. The "White" is thus called the identity of the group of seven rainbow colors. This identity has it's own inverse - the utter darkness ... but we are digressing. Let's get back to our group of seven colors and their singular identity in white. Thus seven colors of the rainbow, along with the identity element "White" are what we may say the manifestation engine of the white light. In other words, the white light has seven underlying separations - Seven knots in `Vaidik` speak...That is probably why in Hindu weddings they take seven circles of fire - seven knots, to mint a single identity for the Bride and the Groom. 

`Gita` says that our conscious experience is also made of just seven knots and one identity. We call it `Ashtdhamool Prakriti`. The eightfold basic nature - the mechanism of creation - `Utpatti`. 

`Dwipayana` described the eightfold basic nature in just two lines .. 

>bhūmir-āpo ’nalo vāyuḥ khaṁ mano buddhir eva cha
>
>ahankāra itīyaṁ me bhinnā prakṛitir aṣhṭadhā
>
> Earth, Water, Air, Space, Fire, fickle mind and intellect - these seven dualistic expressions along with the "identity" (`Ahmkara`) are the constituents of (my) eight fold nature that underpins the consciousness - our experience. It spans on both sides - the physical that is observed as well as the observer. For example the physical solids (Earth) correspond to the Identity, Water corresponds to Intelligence of the observer, Air to the `Mana` - the fickle mind, and Space corresponds to the Energy (symbolized by the fire). 
>
> These knots of the physical and the subtle create the conscious experience. The inverse (or vice-versa) of this total experience is the one unknown locked with in every experience as well as the whole. That is the reason "knowledge" is accessible from any experience. There are infinite ways to know. One can start with a leaf on a tree as much as navigating the complexities of Abstract Algebra - Group theory to be precise that I am using here in a mumbo jumbo fashion to explain the `Vaidik` realizations :-)

Another way to comprehend above conversation is to understand the "Time" - `Kala`.  The "separation" is  an event. A spark of light occurred because a duality of a color and it's anti color was formed and knotted together as a mirror image of each other. If they truly merged, they would annihilate into darkness but they are not merged. They are compacted as mirror images of each other into one - ever so close but never meeting each other - just like two banks of a river. River is manifested because the banks never close on each other. If they did than there is no flow - it is just a loathsome pond waiting to be evaporated. Just like river, the electricity flows with in the separation of positive and negative. The flow stops as soon as the charge difference ends. Time is this flow. Time has no meaning beyond conscious experience and experience is only in the separation.

The moment a spark happens, the conscious experience gives it a shape - a mass. Mass is nothing but the compaction of the many dualities into a shape. As if an orientation is trapped into a body - a physical shape that expresses a specific orientation of knowledge. This marks the beginning of the conscious experience - the beginning of the Time for this new manifestation. The time ends when dualities are unlocked but the purpose of the manifestation isn't the exit from the body. If that was so why would there be a creation in the first place? The purpose really is to understand and to see what is it that is locked in the myriad knots. 

The challenge for the physical shape is to understand the knowledge. The best strategy is to survive as long as possible. Or to seek a different shape. Or to collude with other shapes to evolve consciousness. Over endless trials, certain configurations (or collusions) do better than others. Such evolutions are templated. These successful templates of creation along with the affinity to spark is what we know as `Vishnu` - the manifestative potency. The inverse of the manifestative potency is the one that removes all the "un-survivable" manifestations. It decays all those permutations that can't improve the conscious experience or those which  couldn't form stable connections to lend themselves more time. This potency (of discretion) is called `Siva`. The equilibrium of `Vishnu` and `Siva` is - `Bramh`. Since `Vishnu` and `Siva` are a combination of color and it's anti-color - their coming together as a spark must also have a shape. This shape is what we know as the universe. In essence `Bramh` is the universe. The templates  of the creation (`Vishnu`) and those of selection (`Siva`) are retained in this field - i.e. knowledge is held in `Bramh`.  A better way to put this is `Bramh` is the physical created from knowledge and it holds the knowledge with in it.  `Bramh` has all the answers, all we need is right set of questions!  

The evolution doesn't stop with humans. We may be tempted to assume that we are the most evolved creations but there are many species in `Vaidik` discussions that have much greater conscious experience -   `Gandharvas` , `Yakshas`, `Devtas` to name a few. But humans have a unique gift - their ability to accomplish sophisticated actions -  `Karma`. Opportunity to experience a human form is thus deemed as a blessing. It is by far the best shape to understand the nature of the "knowledge" and many humans accomplish this feat on a regular basis. However, only once in a while a careful stroke of luck leads to a special one who could live to write the shape of the knowledge for the rest of us. Who could probe `Bramha` with questions complex as well as subtle. In such cases the questions are said to be answered by the Knowledge herself - or an incarnation...

# `Utpatti`

She found herself in a bed made of flowers when she woke up. It was early morning. Light was slowly filling up the entrance of the cave. She quickly fixed her rags and hair, and stepped out of the cave. She saw `Maharishi` sitting in a `Samadhi` (sitting upright in a trance). There was holy fire burning in front of the `Yogi`. The place smelled of Sandal wood. Later she realized this part of the island was full of Sandal trees. She sat there, grasping the serenity of the space, trying to make a sense of it all. The events of last night played in her mind. She tried hard to sequence the things but there was no recollection after she lost herself on the boat. Entire evening felt hazy and distant as if a memory was pulled off her brain. Last thing she knew was a sprinkle of cold `Yamuna` water on her face.

While she was thinking of the night that she missed, a thick fog surrounded the cave. It was as if the smoke from the holy fire froze into smog to make an invisible circle around. She felt comforted in the hideous state of everything around her — free from her painful past. She also felt a strange feeling in her stomach. As if, a life had taken place in her.

> In most living beings the conception  is predicated on separation of a living form into a male and a female - sexual. Male and females are just two broad categories like a color and it's anti-color. The way there are infinite shades of colors, there are as many shades of females (and their corresponding males). These infinite shades (and their inverses) - Together they form the identity of a specific species. This separation like the separation of colors, bears a complete copy of knowledge and the templates that are destined to evolve to higher degree of conscious experience - at least to the current evolutionary state of the species. The double helix of DNA is that template. However, a distinction must be made. The knowledge is always complete. The instruction set (DNA) is only the evolution of conscious experience. That doesn't mean it is NOT important. This conscious experience is the only bridge we have to understand the and see the expanse of knowledge.
>
> Just like there are infinite possible combinations of colors - each with its own anti-color; the male and females are also chosen pairs to fulfill the identity. When such compatible pairs interlock in one identity, a child is born. While the  natural process is sexual, science has shown us the means to circumvent the process - to an extent to create altogether new breeds. Even with in humans, a child with certain target skills is possible. Such unions are clinical - loveless as much as lust less. They are for a specific purpose. In `Vaidik` speak , such births are said to be through interventions  of `Yog Maya`. 


Am I pregnant? — She didn't intend to disturb the `Samadhi` but the words just came of her mouth. `Parāśara` opened his eyes. He gazed at her with a welcome look — Yes — he said. Do you need anything? There is fresh milk and fruits, and he pointed to a grotto next to the entrance of the main cave. 

The main cave led to a cavern that had sweet `Yamuna` water flowing at it's base. She also saw her boat moored there. Now she understood why `Maharishi` loved the island. It was a replica of heaven on earth. She also got an inkling that the place was given ghostly character to keep the tourists and wanderers away. For the first time, she felt as if she was part of something bigger. She felt excited and curious at the same time. What exactly is going on? She wanted to know. `Maharishi` could guesstimate what was playing on her mind.

"Things reveal as their time comes" — She heard `Maharishi` at her back. She turned back to him. A smile on her face conveyed that she was happy and was on board.

## 9.1
----

Next few months were magical for `Matsya`. She would wake up to the slow chants of hymns and the smoke from holy fire surrounding the caves as a shield. She would go out with `Maharishi` to pick up fruits. There were goats to get milk. `Maharishi` showed her the skills to survive in a jungle. After first full moon, `Maharishi` told her the time had come to start `Dwaipayana's` education for the things he would learn in the comfort of motherly womb, would last him a lifetime. 

`Maharishi` taught her `Sanskrit`. She quickly picked up the difficult language. `Maharishi` himself chanted all the `Mantras` to her. It became a daily ritual. Learning Sanskrit got lot easier for her, because `Maharishi` was developing a new method to train the students. In this new learning process, reciting and scribing, would go 'hand in hand' . And he used palm leaves for scribing. The island was the only place in and around `Mathura` with Palm trees. Maharishi would stack a dozen palm leaves every night on the fire such that they were slowly smoked inside out. They both used these leaves to scribe the `Sanskrit` alphabet —  first `Maharishi` wrote, and then `Matsya` copied the alphabet to simple words. Slowly she started scribing simple sentences and got at ease in conversing in `Sanskrit`. She realized that the language was natively developed to speak poetry on the go! 

There was subtle, but planned experimentation , `Matsya` realized, that `Maharishi` was using this time to gradually increase the smoking duration, temperature and distance from the fire to get the best possible color and flexibility in palm leaves — like a cloth. And he was refining the ink as well. Starting with simple Henna paste, he had mixed number of soils and heated the mixture to get a permanent impression of inscription. Now she understood why `Maharishi` was carrying the Palm leaf with him when he returned from the island in their first meeting. 

It was probably a daily mud bath followed by a fresh water swim in `Yamuna`; Sandal wood lotion that `Maharishi` himself made for her; or the vegan diet of milk and fruits — Or the growth of internal knowledge; that made her beautiful. But she assumed it were the blessings of `Maharishi`! And who knows?

As `Matsya` was learning, her mind took on new dimensions of thought. She started asking more and more questions. More she asked, more did `Maharishi` explain.  Not only her mind, but her body started taking a new shape. Her skin glowed. Her hair got long and silky and her smell was gone, replaced by everlasting musk. Songs came to her lips. She learnt to dance slow with setting sun —  to exhale the excess energy. And she learnt to recite Vedas with rising sun to fill the universal energy back in. She attained fine equilibrium with universe as she got proficient in breathing techniques (`Pranayama`) — the core of `Naad Yoga`. `Maharishi` started digging deeper into the hymns, beyond the superficial meaning that met untrained eyes. And `Dwaipayana` heard it all, in the safety of his mother's womb.

She gazed and understood the motion of stars in the night sky. And she understood the effect of lunar phases on the waves of `Yamuna`. She knew it was `Yamuna's` holy water that blessed her with this baby but she wondered if `Maharishi` ever embraced her! Ever made love to her like a man would do to his wife. She wanted to know but she was too shy to ask. And she wouldn't change an iota of this new relationship for it felt divine. Even if she was a surrogate, it was well worth the time and the experience. But she didn't know the darkness of that night also got carried to her womb. The boy would be darkest of complexion. And thus the name `Krishna` that meant born out of darkness. But his spirit also captured all the stars of that dark night. He would see depths of the space that no one in the sun-lit day could ever. He would see beyond the motion of “Time” and bind it to the words. Words that would flow like `Yamuna` to carry all other opinions along with. And just like `Yamuna` they would span the heights of `Himalayas` to the depths of the ocean.

## 9.2
---

Time moved fast. She was carrying the weight of a divine child. Her breasts swelled up as motherhood took over her. She wanted to be close to `Maharishi` but he knew better. He knew this joy was transient. Enormous pain (of bondage) was waiting for `Matsya` when she must let a part of her own body go — the curse of motherhood. If you create something complete, you must let it go to prove the "completeness". But her curse was bigger of all mothers. She must leave him behind and even break the bond of vicinity. For a mother, the biggest pleasure is to see her creation (child) grow.

`Maharishi` knew, every ride of joy must follow with equal load of sorrow. He wanted to keep his distance. He knew it was a divine grace that `Matsya` was turning into most beautiful woman, but he had underestimated the desires that might take on his own mind. It took all his learning and then some, to keep his heart unflinching, and yet fully attached in every chore. Never letting `Matsya` (and yet to be born`Krishna`) feel the absence of his strength, but never crossing the line. He knew it was a test. A test he must pass to pave a new path for the rest. Every night and every morning, he burnt his desires in the holy fire and turned them into hideous smog. He knew he was only a father — not a lover. And he knew his sacrifice was a minion, for the biggest sacrifice was for a mother to leave her offspring behind,  with someone else:  even in the hands  of a trusted `Yogi`.

The question that haunted him was how `Matsya` would bear the pain that his plan must inflict upon her - separation from her child. He must give her the tools to understand the truth — see the dualistic reality as it was. And that he did. He named her `Satyawati` — bearer of Truth. He showed her that the truth lies amidst the extremes of dualities - beyond our conscious perception. We only see one side of the coin. If we are lucky, we may be able to comprehend the other side. We can ascertain through logic that for "Yellow", there must exist an "anti-yellow" but this is just the beginning of the quest. The true journey begins when we take baby steps to understand what is the nature of "knowledge" held with in ...

In a slow subtle manner, he imparted to `Satyawati`, life learnings of his quest, to make her worthy of the name! And also to impart this "information" to `Krishna` - information about potential doors to initiate the true quest ..

First - that the desires were the root of all pains. In that he denounced the `Dravya Yazna` as it was rooted into desires. `Satyawati` asked then why would anyone work!, for she thought desires were the basis of all that we do. `Maharishi` pointed her to the nest that a bird-pair made atop the tree where they were sitting. He asked her if these birds made the nest out of desires or was it their `Karma`?  He then pointed to `Yamuna` — Does this river flow out of desires? Smiling to confused `Satyawati`, he said — Desires are not the basis of actions, for nothing in this universe may stay action-less even for a moment. "Action" is fundamental. In fact, "action" is life. Desires, on the other hand, make us action-less for we waste precious time thinking about desired objects, or chasing specific outcomes. And channeling our natural actions into the ones that appear to get us closer to a desired goal. He further added — Desires not only waste the time, they are the source of our wave nature. Waves of joy and grief. If we get what we desired, we feel happy, if we don't we feel miserable. In essence desires lend wave nature to human psyche, that makes our reality dualistic. He cited his father `Śakti Muni` who postulated that most humans change their ‘one chosen’ path because of failure to meet desired goals. They than chase another goal, another deity, and thus get caught in the web of bondage. Thus, it is the desires that take one away from their righteous path. `Śakti` means power. His father was named `Śakti Muni` because he demonstrated that dominion over one's desires was the only way to sustain inner power over duality.

Second - that the only way to overcome desires was to stay busy in ‘actions’. Desires lead to momentary elation (followed by sorrow) — ‘actions’, on the other hand, lead of peace and knowledge.

What kind of actions one must do? — asked `Satyawati` — If one must not be driven by the desires, then how was she expected to know what are the right actions for her.

That is exactly what `Krishna` is supposed to figure out! — smiled `Maharishi`— How do we overcome desires and still be indulged in actions? Is it one set of actions for all the human beings or is it different for everyone? How does it change with time and situation? The righteous actions.

 This was probably the birth of `Karm Yoga` that young `Krishna` learnt in his mother's womb. And, among many things, it also stayed with `Satyawati`. She , truly subsumed herself into a new identity along with birth of `Krishna`. As `Satyawati` took him for first holy dip in `Yamuna`, the mighty river rose to touch his feet. It washed over `Satyawati` too, to give her the true perspective. Truth that we are all bound by the waves of joy and grief. Bigger the rise, deeper the fall. Truth that the child in her hands was not hers alone. He must go on to strife the world off duality. And that she must enable him with all the right actions. How could she let duality take over her mind when she was literally the mother of the one made to define the 'righteous path'. 

 `Krishna Dwaipayana` was born on full moon night of Summer. `Satyawati` forgot the pain of carriage and the pain of labor, as she looked at the child. The day is celebrated to this date, as `Guru Poornima`.

## 9.3
-----
Two years of hiatus, away from `Ashrama`, had two goals for `Maharishi`. Birth of an heir who would carry forward his mission, and to fine tune the scribing technology. However, his two years long absence was an opportunity that many `Asuras` were waiting for — particularly `Kansa` — son of `Ugrasen`. 

With `Maharishi` gone, there was no one to stop `Kansa` from whatever he wanted to do. As he became sure that `Maharishi` was gone for good, he house arrested aging `Ugrasen` and became a king for all practical purposes. Exposure to independent rule, further flamed his lust for power. He needed more money to improve his army, cavalry and elephants. But more so because his needs for pleasures were endless. 

Driven by equally ill advisors, `Kansa` announced a major tax on the `Ashrama`. One hundred gold coins must be paid immediately to king's exchequer for the past dues, or vacate the holy land of `Vasishtha` , `Sakti` and `Parasara`. And hence forth, he demanded a charge of fifty gold coins per year. That was quite reasonable — he thought —  given the congregation was literally awash in wealth - `Kaam Dhenu`.

`Maitreya`, who was running the congregation in absence of `Maharishi`, didn't take the new rules without contest . He approached `Ugrasen` for the excesses of `Kansa` only to find that `Ugrasen` was even more helpless. He then approached `Vasudev`, `Kansa's` brother-in-law, who was a rational man as much as `Kansa's` sister `Devki`. Both of them raised the concern to the council of clerics in `Ugrasen's` court but they found all of them pawns, playing in the hands of `Asuras`. `Vasudev` and `Devki` were deeply worried and wondering if or not continue building their new wedding in `Mathura` or move to the nearby empire across `Yamuna` where king `Shantanu` was heard to be just and peace loving. And his son `Devvrata` was a true leader of good men. 

Before `Vasudev` could take further action, `Kansa` limited his mobility too — a house arrest till he be tried under fake charges of treason. Without `Maharishi` , `Maitreya` was at a stalemate except that he had a trusted friend in the council who sent him daily updates of `Kansa's` plans. Unfortunately, those updates only aggravated the worries .. 

----
