The flight back home was quiet. The Friend felt she was finally discovered by the bigger league. The Mentor was sure more than his humble looks - she thought. She felt rich - with one full coin in her wallet and an unsaid contract to work for at least next six months . Most other creative projects were barely a week long. They paid her bills but she had to keep an eye on her balance for the work demanded being in one of the most expensive city. And a flying car was the only way to commute in over crowded San Francisco. If you dared to walk you were sure to step over a homeless person. Despite all the AI dollars, the homelessness was still rampant - no one could figure out a solution. So much so that they started saying that spirit of SF was in the litters on the street. On the other hand, Being a back-end guy, the Boyfriend could stay in the suburbs. And walk his two dogs. He charged tenth of percent for the payments. Not a bad evening for him either.

Boyfriend loved his work. He was passionate about the technology - a borderline geek. He mixed well with Angel and Fairy and that was important to the Friend - this was the only group where she could be herself. And she liked that he made conscious effort to be part of this group - like he always donated small tips to Fairy's environmental causes even when he was on shoestring. Except for one small issue - he was not fully aligned to Fairy's idea of activism. He was fine with most the issues she worked on - for example advocacy to get fair credit to humans. [^fairCredit]. But she was not cosy to the idea of burning 90 % of compute on the transaction layers - her primary issue being the climate. She attributed those forest fires to the increasing global temperature - particularly after visiting one herself few weeks back. Boyfriend, on the other side believed that climate threat was a hoax[^hoax]. He made sure he never broached this topic in Friday meet ups but off late, Fairy was getting more vocal about her convictions. That left little wiggle room to breathe freely in friend circle because the social media was anyway all about energy conservation. The media cared less if the compute was being invested on AI or on open infrastructure - the general vibe was to consume less among Angels and Wizards. Whereas humans wanted more and more of the free stuff.

It wasn't for the lack of trying to the nuances in layman terms, but Fairy always turned a dumb face. You can't engage disinterested. For example she laughed off to the idea that Bitcoin was not competing with any sovereign currency. It was simply a data layer below the currencies - to record proof of work. Because a currency must be substantiated with the amount of work it's one unit could get done - that is the only way to remove a commodity backfill. Currencies only need to provide liquidity among different players before they settle on the bitcoin data layer. Lightening was a data layer of liquidity instituted as a protocol to the first native bitcoin currency - a `Satoshi`, but no one stopped any sovereign currency to provide similar transparent and efficient liquidity layer. It was a different thing that most sovereign currencies just couldn't compete with "Sats" because it was super fast and lowest fees network that enabled true micro-payments at a universal scale. 

He appreciated a common consumer of financial services such as Fairy, may not be interested in payment layers. He always checked back with the Friend if he was bringing his work to the dinner table and always tried to keep the interventions brief bit what about Nostr. Nostr was the backbone of social media. He tried to explain to the Fairy that Nostr was a general data layer for all sorts of other applications. It was easy for people to recognize the separation of applications from the operating systems but data was always intuitively considered part of the application. Every legacy application used to have it's own data model and some sort of database hooked to suit the purpose. They all followed their own rules. Bitcoin, Lightning and Nostr standardised those rules and turned them into a "protocol" [^protocol]. With these underlying protocols, wizards[^wizards] democratized the data [^data]. 

He expected Fairy should understand these basic ideas which to his mind had nothing to do with technology - for example the standardised data layer(s) also meant a friction to a world fast getting overtaken by artificial intelligence. There was hardly any realtime application with significant user base that didn't use AI in some shape or form - some of them downright scary. AI was probably the most important issue for activism but Fairy never showed any interest in understanding the changing business landscape. She simply hated the VCs who brought their investments to AI. It is easy to boo someone but booing alone is not enough. System must provide better avenues for the investments. Bitcoin offered that alternative. For an investor, they must have greater return on their dollars in AI than simply investing in the data layer(s). Which interalia meant, more efficient applications.  With better returns on their applications investors kept buying into BTC that led to higher BTC price and hence better return on the compute invested in data layer - a virtuous cycle. Fairy thought it was a never ending rat race while he thought it was evolution of intelligence. He was happy that at least Angel was sympathetic to his ideas. Angel never thought AI was a risk but tonight something else was playing on his mind.

Angel was not sure where this narrative was heading to! What does Mentor really want to communicate. He was now fully convinced that the fire incident was off the radar. But now his worry shifted to how this new project is taking shape. Are we all going to work actively on it. How much time he would need to commit?  - for his plate was full in Biotech. The bees project was already in his past. His next endeavor was already looking good but it was even darker. He was asked to join the Sleep Project as an expert on "unintended consequences". Sleep interface was widely used by humans to let their brains be used by compute intensive AI application - such as air traffic control. It was an attempt to capture human minds - dubbed as green compute to lower AI's dependence on Silicon based traditional resources. But the new usage patterns were even more demanding. Angel was being asked to look at the unintended consequences - thanks to his experience with the honey project. He was among the first to identify this loophole in bio designs - and got his voice heard - thanks to association with the Mentor. He felt Mentor was excited at the prospect of this visualization project but he knew he could never say no in case he was asked to contribute. That - he thought - was the downside of being closer to the powerful - you must adjust your priorities! At the end - he liked that now his close group was plugged in - at least Fairy won't complaint if worked eighty hours weeks between his work and this project.

Fairy was busy reading the next post. She was keen on what went on between `Shantanu` and `Matsya` on his return to the boat. She was least concerned with the plans, future or even tomorrow. She simply lived in the moment. She said what she truly felt like. In this moment she wanted to live those human emotions - so difficult to relate to her race.

The night had many things going in parallel. New ideas, new convictions, new connections being formed - as if something was getting reorganized - yet it was humble and subtle. It was somewhat like that night on the banks of `Yamuna` when `Shantanu` made a connection with `Satyawati` but in that subtle connection he joined the vast network of `Mathura`. He didn't realize he was now part of a master plan that had it's roots in the vision of `Bramhrishi` and that was spun into action by the `yogi` who could see future - `Maharish Parāśara`.

# `Ratri` - Night
---

Sun had already gone down as king hurried to the docks. `Maharishi` had suggested many times to have the king spend a night at `Ashram` for finding a return passage at this hour might be difficult. Boats stopped plying with the sun set. Little did he know that king had already planned his return. 

As they reached closer to the bank, king could see a single boat. And he got the unmistakable  musky smell as the wind turned a corner towards them. `Satyawati` had asked `Dashraaj's` youngest daughter `Saryu`, who still worked on the boat, to return back home with gold coins for she didn't want to have the gold on them as the evening approached. The older sisters were already married in nearby village. `Saryu` offered to stay back though she wanted to be the one to handover Gold to her father. 

`Satyawati` was sure, by now, `Dashraj` must be celebrating the unexpected bounty - with his undercover `Asura` friends, who stayed in the village. She told `Saryu` to let `Dashraj` know she might be very late for she had promised the rich farmer a passage back, and she was anyway used to be on the river in nights. It was not the first time `Satyawati` decided to stay back on the waters. Many of such nights she been to the island, alone, rekindling the memories of her days with `Maharishi` and `Krishna`. Her hopes of seeing them again diminished as the time passed. Sometimes, she wondered, if those days actually happened. Five years was a long time and each day was a battle with herself. She wondered the moment we get everything we ever wanted - in her case beauty, fragrance and success - we immediately start craving for something else. She also noted that her cravings slowed down as the time passed. They were always at the back but she learnt to live with them and now she was probably ready to move on. 

She was quite surprised when she saw the farmer being escorted by three `Yogies`. She already knew he wasn't an ordinary man for no one would gift gold for a boat ride, but the fact that he was escorted by `Yogies` meant he was lot more than his appearance. She thought to herself - Who exactly is he? Then she saw a boy walking behind them. His dark complexion mixing with the ensuing darkness of the evening. Her heart skipped a beat for a premonition told her it was `Krishna` - her son.

The older `Yogies` knew her well from their frequent visits to the village and they had taken her boat number of times to cross the river; but `Maharishi` had made sure he and `Krishna` never crossed her path. 

If this is `Krishna`, why did `Maharishi` send him this time? — she thought — Is there a message?  

She was still wondering when `Lomaharshana` one of the older `Yogies` bowed to her and asked - `Maa` (means mother but this is a standard way for `Yogies` to address older women), are you planning a ride across the river ?

`Satyawati` woke up from her thoughts - Yes `Yogi`! - do you all want to go across ?

No `Maa`, only `Maharaaj` would like to go back to his camp on the other side. We are happy to come with you, should you need someone with you on your return for safety. Or we may wait here till you come back. - said the `Lomaharshana`.

That won't be necessary `Yogi`. `Yamuna` is like my mother! I am safer with her than any place on earth - `Satyawati` smiled - btw, you said `Maharaaj`? Of where? - `Satyawati` asked folding her hands.

`Yogi` almost bit his tongue. He didn't realize that `Shantanu` was under cover and the thought that he blew king's cover hit him like a brick. 

`Krishna` quickly understood the situation. He was about to intervene but `Shantanu` stopped him with gesture of his right hand. 

`Devi` (a common address for an upper class woman), I am `Shantanu`, king of `Kuru` Kingdom - He said, knowing there was no harm in losing his cover. In fact, he thanked the fate for making it easy to let his true identity be revealed to `Satyawati`. For one he was tired of playing the "hide and seek" through out the day, second he did want `Satyawati` to know who he was. It had be hard to reveal it himself. That would seem as if he was trying  to impress her with his position though he actually wanted to do exactly that.

`Satyawati` didn't know how to react. He had the most powerful king right in font of her and possibly her long separated son too. She remembered the words of `Maharishi` - "You will rule the world". She was, however, not aware of the weight of such a reality! 

She almost sat down by the weight of the moment. She had thought about `Maharishi's` words almost every day since she left him and `Krishna` behind, but she didn't realize the physical truth would be so much bigger, and so abrupt, and shocking. She felt excited, overwhelmed and hundreds of more emotions striking like a thunderbolt. As the moment passed, `Satyawati`, once again staged a quick recovery. She readied herself for the enormous opportunity destiny had delivered on her hands.

`Krishna` moved a step closer and held her hand. Being a child it felt okay for him to hold the hand of a woman almost her mother's age. He didn't know yet he was holding his real mother. 

And who are you `Yogi`, never seen you around - `Satyawati` asked to reconfirm her premonition. 

I am `Krishna` `Maa` - Son of `Maharishi Parāśara` - said Krishna, oblivious to all that had transpired to get to this moment in time.

And who is your mother `Krishna` - `Satyawati` wanted to see if her son knew his own roots. When she saw `Krishna's` face blanking out, she asked - How would you know everything that is there to know without knowing who you are?

> How would you know everything that is there to know without knowing who you are?

A simple question, yet so profound. `Yogies` left the banks as king and `Satyawati` boarded the boat. On his way back, `Krishna` thought why did `Maharishi` never brought the topic of his mother. Why such a simple truth is hidden from humans. Why don't we automatically know our lineage? - our oldest history.

Any other child would have rushed to his father to check who his mother was ? But `Krishna` was no ordinary child. That night, `Krishna` climbed his favorite tall tree and sat there. This was his den when difficult questions troubled his child mind. If `Maharishi` sought not to tell this simple thing, there must be a reason — he thought — more importantly does every manifestation hides something? 

Is Sun and the moon and the mother Earth, that we perceive with our senses, hide something behind the perceivable. If that was true, would it be right to say bigger the manifestation, bigger was the hidden truth? Then what is the biggest manifestation of all? Isn't it the human body itself? What does this body hides behind it? Is it what `Maharishi` calls `Atma`? He didn't know when he slept, on the tree. Many questions still unanswered but he knew what to ask. And he also knew truth must reveal itself if we asked the right questions. 

`Maharishi` had told him never to seek answers — instead, seek the right questions to know the truth!


----

As the boat merged into the waves of `Yamuna`, `Shantanu` too wanted to seek the truth — from himself. Is he open to a new relationship or he must carry on with the memories of his past? 

`Yamuna` was shining bright with the young full moon. As the boat got stable, `Shantanu` thought `Satyawati` would sing a song. Five minutes into the ride , he asked her if she didn't like to sing in the evenings? `Satyawati` was caught off-guard — `Maharaaj` I have never sung in front of a king. I am not sure if I am talented enough to indulge you in my music. 

King stood up from his seat and walked close to `Satyawati` — your song was probably the best I have ever heard. May I know your name? And what family you belong to? — `Shantanu` was eager to break into a conversation. The desires that were born in the morning, were now playing all sorts of tricks. Alone with her in the night, on calm `Yamuna` with slight breeze, and musky smell surrounding him like a thick fog, he could have easily blamed the moon for turning his mind upside down. And he justified his thoughts based on what `Krishna` said this morning — a king must give the empire a worthy queen. Is she the one he was looking for all his life ? Is it the time he must move on from memories of `Ganga`. Why should he bear the loneliness when it was `Ganga` who decided to move on ?

`Maharaj` my name is `Satyawati` and I am daughter of of the village head `Dashraaj` — `Satyawati` wanted to make sure king didn't go deeper into her identity. She didn't want the word `Matsya` re-tagged back to her. 

King took a closer look at her. In her late twenties or early thirties, she still looked like a girl. And her musky smell got even stronger as king stepped closer — Are you married `Satyawati` ? 

Her heart skipped a beat, but right after, a smile came on her face — a confirmation that she knew her future. `Maharishi's` words seemed true now — One of them might take you as his wife and there after you will rule the world" . The king of largest empire known was asking a fisher girl if her heart was free to take him in. She found the desire to rule the world building up in her groin. This is her moment. She was not meant to ferry a boat all her life. Her life has a purpose. But she must use this opportunity. She looked at the King. Her eyes gazed deep into `Shantanu's`. With a smile on lips — what do you want `Maharaj`? Of course I am not married and there is none in this village that might win my heart!

King got first glimpse of her eyes. Deeper than `Yamuna`. He found himself lost. And that smell. He couldn't figure if it was real or a dream. All he knew that his truth was right in front of him. She was the one. His soulmate and the queen of the kingdom. He must not let this moment pass without avail. He slowly moved his hand to take one of hers — Will you be my queen and come with me to the royal palace?

`Satyawati` blushed. As beautiful as she was , she looked even more for she found her own kingdom in the heart of `Shantanu`. King's heart was clear. And his touch the warmest she had ever felt. A part of her wanted to give her entire self to `Shantanu` right there, but the reason prevailed. She let `Shantanu` take both her hands — `Maharaj` you will need to speak with my father if you must take me as your wife !


`Shantanu` was pleased with her acceptance and valid pre-condition. It showed she could exercise her will but still maintain the tradition — a pre-requisite to the highest position of royal queen.  — he thought — She is definitely not the one to slip for his wealth and why should she?  Gods have gifted here the best of looks , voice , smell and mind. Bowing down on one knee `Shantanu` took out a ring from his little finger and proposed to her kissing her hands — Sure, I will meet your father tomorrow soon !

___

`Maharishi` woke up in the middle of the night. He wasn't able to get to sound sleep this night. Something, he felt, was going on and it wasn't that he met the king or his proposal was accepted. Destiny was weaving a web at deeper levels that he didn't have ready access to. As he stood up to drink water, he saw through his window, `Krishna` was sitting on his tree. He understood `Krishna` must have met `Satyawati`. That meant King had met `Satyawati`. The pain of the thought was his truth.

As he sat down he wondered if he did right to keep `Krishna` away his mother? He felt proud on the knowledge he demonstrated this afternoon but his knowledge needed impregnation with reality. He must indulge in something physical. He needs to find his purpose.

---

`Dashraj` had a night of his life. First he thought how to hide the Gold. Once properly secured, he headed to the local pub with "drinks on me" slogan. All his friends ate and drank belly-full till the middle of the night. On his way back, he marveled at his genius for having found a cash cow in `Satyawati`. And then he worried if she left like older girls to marry someone. He must crop any plans of her wedding even before they get framed. `Satyawati` was his path to riches and a daily celebration on the local pub. With the money he had, he was planning to set up a small metal shop to make finest hand-crafted swords. This would be his passage back into the politics of `Kansa` now that `Maharishi` was dethroned. He must set the plans fast in motion.

--- 

The ride back to his camp was lost in time for `Shantanu`. He didn't know when he started and when he reached the camp. Sleep was no where near the king. He was planning the communications he must send tomorrow morning. One to his son `Dev` for deploying best of his river crew for the island. Second, to `Kansa` for the deal of the island. And third, and probably most important, to `Dashraj` for a face to face meeting. Should he go to his home or should he invite him over. He thought later would be appropriate because he didn't want to step into `Kansa's` land. His own life seemed precious now. 

---

`Satyawati` didn't go home that night. She spent some time on `Yamuna` and took another trip to the island. As she stepped into her cave, she felt calm as if surrounded in a mother's lap. She was excited but she wasn't sure how `Maharishi` was feeling right now. Does he know? He does know everything. Does it mean she would never be together with `Krishna` ?

---

`Yamuna` the river, spoke to `Mathura` the city that night — to let her know that her times were changing. Very soon, `Mathura` would be the most important city ever in the history. 

> Truth is what happens in the physical reality. History is the outcome of "actions" in our tiny box. Only truth has the staying power in public discourse.


### Notes and Research:
---

[^fairCredit]: Corporations were mandated to save 51 % of their earnings in BTC. This meant everyone could buy more with their savings. There was no universal minimum income, instead different service programs offered enough bounties to enable humans an easy life of choice. However corporations could reduce their earnings by investing more on AI intensive projects. The bone of contention was always if the AI investment of a business was fair. That is where activism played a major role - content, advocacy, votes

[^hoax]: The climate hoax
- The idea that the few degrees rise in planet's temperature would cause a havoc to the planet was the biggest lie ever told by mainstream media. The space is a cold place. The average temperature of space is 2.73 Kelvin (-270.42 Celsius, -454.75 Fahrenheit). This is actually the temperature of Cosmic Microwave Background Radiation, which is spread throughout the universe. Heating a massive planet like earth to somewhere around 57 degrees Fahrenheit (13.9 degrees Celsius) - the average temperature of Earth according to National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) - is a miracle of Gods. 
- If human endeavor is work of God than we must strive to increase the temperature of Earth and that is exactly what mankind had been doing from the day they first landed on this planet. 
- The philosophical angle aside, increasing the temperature means the fresh water locked in the polar caps can be unlocked. This fresh water increases the sea level means oceans have more surface area. Which means more evaporation. Which means more rain. Which means deserts can go green. Which simply means more oxygen. The idea to reduce carbon emissions is also counterproductive because more plants can always consume more carbon.
- Yes, melting the ice caps is a threat for the polar bears. But if survival has taught us anything it is that they would adapt. If they didn't they would perish. But look at the hypocrisy - the very people who eat millions of cows everyday talk at their steak laden dinner plates about the plight of polar bears.
- And yes, it would be little inconvenient for the ones with massive real estate with great views of the Pacific and Atlantic. Well think about people living in deserts of Sahara and Thar. Those who aspire for a drop of rain and pray to Gods for a single downpour in an year. Their lives appear to be benefiting from the climate change.
- But simply speaking - the most important is the selfish argument. Humans simply need more power to run more compute. No matter what you preach - humans would consume every ounce of energy that is out there. No one can stop this. We simply suck up every bit of energy to provide "proof of work".

[^protocol]: What is a protocol
- At the simplest level a protocol is a way of working agreeable to all the participants.
- Since by definition it is agreeable to all the participants, there is no debate or "reason" - there is no question. It is not to say that a protocol can't be improved. It can be improved only with 100% buy in. 
- In technology space, TCP/IP is a protocol. It describes how computers should talk to each other. There is another protocol on these lines - communication between computers - that didn't get as much recognition as TCP/IP - Gossip. It has it's own unique relevance particularly in the distributed computing.
- In religious space - God is a protocol, avoiding the sins is a protocol.
- The value of a protocol is in it's global acceptance. Thus a protocol needs to be something that is honored by all it's players. Which means it must be good for everyone. If something is good for everyone it is obviously good. Because it defines the good. That is the reason "God" is good. 
- Since there is no room for debate or reason with the protocol - it is simply agreed on behaviour - like saying "Good Morning" when you meet someone first time in  the morning - in that, it means faith.
- As the acceptance of protocol increases, it gets exponentially harder to change it because you need 100% acceptance. Thus no one can change TCP/IP. It's improvements must be communicated well in advance and feedback must be taken from all the stakeholders. This however doesn't mean new protocols can't be instituted. For example TCP/IP is a computer communication protocol but Bitcoin is a protocol to transfer the value. Lightning is a protocol to provide liquidity. And Nostr is a protocol to separate data layer from real-time applications with massive user base such as social networks, DNS, ride sharing, messaging, publications, news networks, banking. The key aspects of Nostr is enabling the users to carry their data with them to different applications. Bitcoin, Lightning and Nostr have similarities in their design elements but most importantly they provide the design basis for distributed databases with universal rules - they are protocols for data management.

[^wizards]: Who are Wizards
- The power of following the protocol is a network effect. If you have faith in the protocol you experience growth with the growth of the protocol. For example when TCP/IP was in growth phases it was growing at a rate of 2300 x per year. This was the founding insight of Amazon.com. Jeff Bezos thought that if something was growing at this rate one need to hold just one small piece - say selling books online. The growth would automatically manifest into other things. No wonder in mere fifteen years it became the biggest retailer of the world. The faith in the protocol makes you a wizard. This however is not new. The faith in Christ and Mohammad opened door to opportunities many. But even before that the first wizards were who believed in `Veda`. `Veda` was the first vocally stored protocol. 
- Those who don't believe in the protocol end developing their own platforms - sometime big and sometime niche. Such non-believers were termed `Asuras`. They try to propagate their own ideologies but they fail because people could see that they themselves were the first beneficiaries - people could see their greed their vested interest. This is the reason a protocol is always proposed by one who has no vested interest. No greed. Bitcoin is a universal protocol because `Satoshi Nakamoto` had no greed. All other platforms - be it Ethereum or Solana have greed built into them. Not that greed is bad but it makes it hard for others to join the party. 
- The olds were called `Rakshsas`. They appeared strong like the regulators and sovereign leaders but their systems were  obsolete. They were about to perish. They only created triggers to unleash the new innovations as the regulators tried to stop Bitcoin ETFs. 

[^data]: data is the only thing in the entire computing landscape that never changes. You can change the code on the client side to see the data in different layouts. You can change the code for underlying infrastructure to store in a better database. You can make the architecture from client server to distributed. Everything can change given enough attention or time or money. Only thing that never changes is the data. The data layer is thus the lowest layer. It is deeper than operating system or even a computer. It is simply what happened in the real world.
