# The Question ..

The all important question — if (or not), there exists one unique righteous path? — was a matter of regular discussion that ran deep in the family. `Vaśiṣṭha`, opined there were many right paths for humans to realize their potential. He felt a farmer was as important as a priest and so was a cobbler. As a pragmatist, `Vaśiṣṭha` wished peace to every one no matter what path they chose. One of the reason `Vaśiṣṭha` was so much influential among the seven `Bramh-rishies` was his blend of knowledge and humility. However, his son `Śakti Muni` argued that even if there were many legit paths, one person, must stick to one path in one life-time. If someone kept changing his course based on changing situations, how s/he is any different from animals? And how would s/he accomplish excellence?

`Śakti Muni` literally practiced what he preached, and he ended up giving his life for the sake of his beliefs. One local version of story of the massacre gave it a totally different perspective. It says, that fateful morning, `Śakti Muni` was en-route to river `Yamuna` with rest of the congregation — for the holy bath before the day breaks in — a daily routine `Vaśiṣṭha` had cultivated in his group. `Bramh-rishi` himself didn't join that morning as he was under weather. `Śakti Muni's` wife too didn't join due to early pregnancy sickness. That ominous morning, a tribal king `Kalmashapada` happened to be returning from `Yamuna`, with his queen and chosen savages — drunk and sleep deprived. Apparently they had spent the night on the banks of `Yamuna` hunting the innocent animals, and roasting them alive to eat with old wines. The shrieks of scared animals were audible to `Śakti Muni` in the silent night, though his abode was quite a distance. In the morning he also got the news that king's men had taken women from the nearby village (with force) and kept them awake whole night — doing whatever they felt right to please themselves and their king. 

In the morning rush hour, `Śakti Muni` expected `Kalmashapada` to clear the way for scripture mandated right of path to a sage, and demanded a sage never gave up his path. On the other side, the king, oblivious to `Śakti Muni's` metaphorical extension of the ideology, expected a clear path for himself and particularly his new beautiful queen. He had expected the sage would shower blessings for their new wedding. In fact, he had hoped that `Śakti Muni` would show up at his picnic place last night to welcome him on this side of `Yamuna`. Anyways, the simple discussion turned into an altercation and out of anger, `Śakti Muni` cursed the king and his troupes to immediately turn into monsters — figuratively — for the monstrosity they spread throughout the night on this peaceful range. That did happen but the king, having turned into a monster, killed `Śakti Muni` and his team. That is what monsters do ! 

Story besides, `Śakti Muni` must have questioned the king for his abhorrent behavior (for that is the righteous calling of a `Nyaan Yogi`) and the king was anyways a monster!

The news of the incident spread like a wild fire. Some saw it at face-value, a sudden rush of blood that went out of control. Others saw a deeper message of stars being misaligned. Many thought, it was a bigger conspiracy. Yes, conspiracy theorists existed even back then! One of the theory claimed `Kalmashapada` was instigated by `Vishwamitra` — another `Bramh-rishi` of the same stature as `Vaśiṣṭha`. No one knows the truth though `Parāśara` did mention this version later in `Vishnu Purana`. 

Truth besides, young `Parāśara` grew in the shadows of this gut-ranching chatter. Such conversations obviously had a traumatic effect on his child mind. And more so, because `Parāśara` had a gifted imagination. For one, he developed a deep hatred for the monsters but more importantly he thought if (or not) one must stick to one's path? Or is there a subset of values that must be followed by every human no matter what path they were on. This was the first seed of `Karm Yoga`. As a youth, he wondered what was that ultimate wisdom? The question that laid heavy on his mind and kinda morphed into a life long quest, was to find those values and scribe them. 

One thing was certain in his mind — mere knowledge of the way universe works, was not enough to attain peace. Just knowing the existence of "One immutable and omnipresent Knowledge" alone didn't get him the peace he wished for everyone. Not even conducting rituals to appease the deities. The path to knowledge was not in merely knowing it's existence. It was in being one with the knowledge. How to get there was the million dollar question! 

The conundrum is nothing new. For example, when we see a computer, we all know for sure the existence of programming languages. But just knowing the existence of "programmability" doesn't mean knowledge of programming. We must do certain actions to learn coding. The necessity to "act" was there in every endeavor — be it mining or agriculture. `Maharishi` was intrigued with this power of actions. What is so potent in "actions" that leads to cultivation of knowledge ? — he wondered. He named this potency of actions' `Karm Yoga` though the underlying science of actions (`Karma`) was still a puzzle. It had take couple more generations and an incarnation of God himself (as `Krsna`) to fully explain the science of `Karma`.

While `Maharishi Parāśara` was pondering over the ideas of `Karm Yoga`, there was another parallel movement happening on `Naad Yoga` side — `Bhakti Yoga` — the `Yoga` of extreme devotion. Many of the `Aacharyas` had built a mass following. Almost like a cult. Their ideas based in grand vision of public good, but the underlying goal, to (also) promote their own moat. Many walled garden were formed. The followers developed blind faith in the words of the high priests. They even translated their narratives (or discussions) into local dialects and narrated them in poetical stories. So much so, the followers started believing mere chanting the names of their `Gurus` could get them to eternal peace. These narratives, mostly in spoken format, were called `Puranas`. In a way, `Puranas` are essential for proper appreciation of `Vedas`, for they provide the historical context. As we alluded earlier, `Vishnu Purana` was told by `Parāśara` himself. He told this story to his disciple `Maitreya` and it is one of the most cited conversation in Hindu Mythology. Sometimes referred to as `Puran-ratna` — a gem among `Purana`. 

The oldest English translation of `Vishnu Purana` is available at internet archives. The book was published by H. H. Wilson (in 1864) in five volumes. The first volume is embedded here for reference.

<center>

<iframe src="https://archive.org/embed/vishnupurnsyst01wils" width="560" height="384" frameborder="0" webkitallowfullscreen="true" mozallowfullscreen="true" allowfullscreen></iframe>

</center>

`Maharishi Parāśara` witnessed `Bhakti Yoga` evolving first-hand. The popularity of this tradition had `Maharishi` reassess the integrity of `Naad Yoga`. He was convinced that extreme devotion did open the entry into power structure and thus material success, but he was not sure it was means to eternal peace (as promised). 

At the same time he would wonder if he, himself, was on right trajectory. He thought the intense dedication of `Bhakti Yoga` was good, if it motivated the followers to indulge in `Karma`, but mere chanting didn't appear to him a passage to the eternal solace. There were many questions that still remained unanswered. Many mysteries unresolved! A `Nyaan Yogi` was caught in ‘duality’ — `Karm Yoga` or `Bhakti Yoga`. 

Age, didn't treat `Maharishi` any different. He knew he must have someone to carry the torch forward. After years of careful study of motion of heavenly bodies and their co-relation with birth of human intelligence, stars were finally aligned. `Maharishi Parāśara` was ready to take a child as his born son. And he named him long before the physical birth — `Krishna Dvaipayana` — Someone who could go beyond duality just like an island between two ˝never-meeting˝ banks of a river. Someone who could establish a middle spot amongst two never concurring ideologies — for the truth lies somewhere near the center. The literal meaning of `Dvaipayana` is ‘born on an island’.

And he saw the potent qualities in  `Matsyagandha`, as prospective surrogate mother.  Despite her ordinary circumstances, she honed in her, the curiosity and poise and the imagination, to gift this world an immortal writer !

----


