The narrative has the power to capture people's imagination. The Fairy and her friend were hooked to the story of `Matsya`. They wanted to know how people reacted to see `Matsya` back in the town. Would they recognize her even though her smell was gone? Would she see the same version of reality that she lived in that village couple years back;  or would she see a new version - may be an anti-version of her world.

As if the Angel read their minds -  you always see something new when you return to your home town - he said -  that is partially true for any place where you spent few years, but home is something that flows in your blood. Thus you notice the diff in detail. You would, otherwise, ignore these changes for the rate is subtle - unnoticeable - as inside a fast moving train. A "return" spotlights the change. But that is not how you see the anti-Yellow.

The Angel continued - to be able to see the inverse of your reality - the other side -  you must change your entire persona. No one must recognize you in your own home - he said - No one even looking for your return. And you must be exact opposite of what you were - a beggar if you were a king, rich if you were poor, handsome if you didn't have the looks, a singer if you were a thinker, and fragrant if you smelled like a fish. Such an internal shift ain't easily possible, that's the reason, we never see the other side. `Buddha` did it when he returned back home after enlightenment - as a beggar, instead of a king. It doesn't matter if the new vantage is good or bad - the purpose really is to see the "white". As you become observant of the color and anti-color, you have a chance to realize your "Identity" - `Swaroopa`.

The Angel thought for a while, looking at his watch - returning to your home with anonymity, and  with exactly opposite persona is a powerful experience. It is like going to your office after many years of retirement - as "a nobody" where you served as a Deputy or a Boss.  You feel as if the walls and the chairs are mocking you for you never cared to notice them. You thought office was made of the "people" and now the reality dawned that the people were most fungible in that confine -  all your peers are gone long back, and all your subs are probably transferred. Same thing happens when you go back to your school after twenty years of graduation. It proves to you that the "knowledge" held "with-in" is always complete. What changes is how you see it. It appears the way you view it. Beauty, in fact, lies in the eyes of the beholder and so is misery.

Tell us more of her return O, good Angel - insisted the friend - now that you have kindled the interest you can't hold the narrative back. As she said it, the mid night bell rang. The club was about to close. 

May be some other time - said the wizard. And then he thought for a while - how about instead of me telling this story, you see it yourself ?

How ? - asked the Fairy - last I checked we still can't travel back in time - she smiled. 

Yup, we can't travel back in time, but you can can see it in your head sets - replied the Angel - How about you come with us - he pointed to the friend - both of you may get into virtual reality at the back seat while I keep my hands on the wheel. He didn't miss the opportunity to curse the traffic controllers -  what is the point of self driving chariots if at least one must be sitting on the steering - he raised his hands in frustration :-)

Yes sure - said the friend - my car can follow you. There is no need for someone to be on the steering if there is no one in the car - strange rules (of the Wizland) - she laughed -  A chariot may drive itself without living beings but if there is even a dog inside, someone must be on the wheel. 

After clearing the bills, the Fairy summoned her Model X. The friend had the latest iteration - they call it Model Theta - what ever it means.  The Angel hopped on to the driver seat while the two friends entered the "Vision Pros" at the back. From the driver seat, the Angel navigated them to a new locale built at the dawn of the civilization. He asked Siri to tune in to the chapter 10 - the Return - the sequence of separation. They could see `Matsya` riding her boat as she waved good bye to `Maharishi`, and her two year old. She had tears in her eyes. And once again, she had no clue what to expect ..

`Maharishi's` eyes watered too. He wished her luck for the reality is fickle. Things may go insanely wrong at the flutter of a butterfly wings. The business of prediction is risky - he thought.

#  The Return .. 

The village was in a state of shock when `Satyawati` made it to the docks. `Maharishi` had fixed her boat that it looked like new. `Matsya` was long gone from the memory of this village. She docked her boat and turned to a group of fishermen who were looking at her in disbelief — Is there a place to stay in this village and also who is the village head here? I wanted to seek permission to moor my boat in this dock — she acted as if she didn't know the docks she grew on! She had practiced this opening line of her new act many times in her mind, but in real, it felt different. And she was excited!

The fishermen were speechless. They had never seen a more beautiful woman and her fragrance was driving them crazy. One of them offered her food that his wife had packed. Other offered to take her to the village head. 

The village head — `Dashraaj` in mid seventies, had seen the life long enough to be enchanted from anything glittering. Or at least that was what he thought. His ideas were forcefully changed by `Maharishi` but at the core, he still thought he had a role to play. His week eyes couldn't see `Satyawati` well enough, but he couldn't resist the smell. It was as if some Goddess stepped into his home. He stood up in respect and offered a seat and water to `Satyawati`. When she sought his permission to dock the boat, he didn't think twice. `Satyawati` saw the power of fragrance firsthand. She was happy. She kept on — Is there a place I could rent to stay. I have some gold. 

The word “gold” rang a pleasant bell in `Dashraaj's` ear — you are village's responsibility. You don't need to spend a penny. You are like a daughter to me, why don't you stay with us? I have three daughters who could help you on the boat. `Satyawati` was getting used to privileges of rich and beautiful! She nodded her acceptance and said thanks in `Sanskrit` to make sure she was considered not only beautiful and rich but educated too. She had her moves fully planned!

The news of arrival of a beautiful 'noblewoman' had already spread in the village. Men and women stopped at whatever they were doing and flocked to village head's home. Everyone was eager to help a single beautiful woman. Some applauded her for navigating rough `Yamuna` alone. `Satyawati` was stunned in the change. How could same set of people ignore poor `Matsyagandha`? It felt like `Matsya` actually died. Something in her told her she needed more power. Power to rule the entire world. She will never be as exposed and as needy as `Matsya` was. She must build on her gifts. She however, was not sure if the desires were taking over her if that was the right thing to do. May be `Krishna` would answer that one day! — she thought. For now, her focus was as clear as the brightness of that summer day.

After few days of rest and enjoying cooked food, `Satyawati` returned to her boat. Along with her, three `Dashraaj` girls. The older one slightly older than her and youngest slightly younger. Middle one was her age. They offered to help her on the boat. She was back in business as she saw a line of commuters growing to board her boat. She smiled and a song came to her lips. Life is gracious for the rich and beautiful — she thought. The thought was soon replaced by the memory of `Krishna`. Every success must be paid in some form, some pain. She reminded herself that `Krishna` was with `Maharishi`. He couldn't have asked for a better father.

Time took the wings again.

`Satyawati's` boat got popular — like a tourist attraction.  People started pouring over just to see her and to listen to her sing.  And of course the fragrance. She got rich but she was still waiting for the next season of `Maharishi's` prediction. `Dashraaj` declared her as his daughter. There were many suitors who would happily surrender their lives' worth for `Satyawati`, but none of them could make her “rule the world”. More importantly, she was curious of the bigger cause that `Maharishi` said she was a part of. For now, she was content with love and respect that she know not existed. And she kept on sharpening her skills — music, singing, looking good and of course smelling good.

----

Things were not as good for `Maharishi` on his return. Back to his `Ashrama`, there was a welcome celebration for `Maharishi` and `Krishna`. No one asked about the mother for they were all busy checking out the toddler who could already speak broken `Sanskrit`. He had the `Gaytri Mantra` by heart. 

The apparent joy in `Ashrama` appeared a bit subdued to `Maharishi`. At the very first chance, he asked `Maitreya` if things were fine. When he found `Maitreya` quiet, `Maharishi` dug deeper. The waves of anger arose in `Maharishi` as he heard about the tax plan and house arrests of his friends — `Ugrasen and Vasudev`. A part of him tempted to repeat the magic he had done in his youth, but then, other part demanded 'new-found' compassion. After-all, what difference between him and `Kansa` if he too acted like a monster !

The news of `Maharishi's` return did alarm `Kansa` , but the evil minds have their own plans. He thought `Ugrasen` and `Vasudeva` need to be further secured to keep them as a bait in case `Maharishi` resorted to his fire traps. On the other side, `Maharishi` had discovered compassion. He tried many routes to show `Kansa` his righteous path. His every move was deemed as a sign of weakness by the misguided youth of `Kansa`. Assuming no threat from `Maharishi`, his misdemeanours turned into felonies, and finally into sheer acts of cruelty. He forced `Acharayas` not to share any donations with the congregation till the `Ashrama` paid up the tax with compound interest. Short of attacking the congregation, he adopted all the tactics to choke the life out of the research work. Worst part was, he seemed to enjoy it all. 

After almost five years of struggle, `Maharishi` finally gave up. He thought Gods himself will deal `Kansa` a lesson, for the time must bring it's own twists. Only thing that kept `Maharishi` going was `Krishna` was shaping up more than his expectations. At a tender age, he was already been through most of scriptures - vocally. And blessed was he with rare memory — once heard, he never forgot a verse — even those complex ones that took normal students months to internalize.

`Kansa` delivered the final nail to the `Ashrama` when he officially declared `Maharishi` and his allies as the enemies of state and asked them to vacate the lands on this side of `Yamuna` with in a month. Time was of the essence. `Maharishi` called a general meeting of all the `Yogies` later that evening — to announce that the `Ashram` needs to be moved to the island. He told his disciples that the island was now free from curse since `Dwaipayana` was born there. And since it was out of `Sur Sena` boundary, `Kansa` had no jurisdiction. But moving a thousand strong congregation was not easy. Housing needs to be built ; jetty was a must, and there were ton of other requirements to migrate the place. `Maharishi` sent a pigeon to `Shantanu` to summon his help if he or some of his leaders were around.

Later that evening, `Maitreya` talked about `Vasudeva` to `Maharishi`. His assessment was `Kansa` might have him killed sooner because he was the only valid stake to the crown. `Maitreaya` had friends in `Kansa's` council who had let out a note to `Maitrya` that `Vasudev's` days were numbered. The plan was to show as if he was trying to escape and back-stab him. The immediate  question was how to delay this inevitable.

Having discussed it together for an hour, they came up with a scheme. Given that it was impossible to get `Vasudev and Devki` out of `Kansa's` clutches, they must provide a good reason for `Kansa` to keep `Vasudev and Devki` alive. Their lives were precious even if they were living behind the bars. 

Being an astrologer extraordinaire, people believed in `Maharishi's` predictions. Most of the times, he didn't want his name attached to his vantage or even the prophesies. But this time, it was different. This time it was a bluff. `Maitreya` sent a pigeon addressed to his accomplice in `Kansa's` council, with a secret message, that he had obviously take to `Kansa`, for `Maitreya` knew his friend played on both sides. It noted that `Maharishi` predicted death of `Kansa`. It said, once `Kansa` killed `Vasudev`, `Devki` too would die of grief with in a week. They would reincarnate such that no one, even with magical powers, could trace their location. And in their next birth, their eighth offspring would kill `Kansa` for the misdeed of killing his sister and her husband.

The object of the message was to abstain `Kansa` from killing `Vasudev`.  But reality is always with some nuances. `Kansa` focused on the word 'eighth'. The message caused panic in his mind. To him, it meant that both `Vasudev` and `Devki` must be kept alive till they have eight off-springs. And he must kill the eighth. He saw it as an advantage to declare it as a divine announcement from the skies. The distorted announcement that went out for public consumption was that eighth child of `Devki and Vasudev` would kill `Kansa`. It legitimized `Kansa's` claim that `Vasudev` had plotted treason with the help from divine forces. He must be kept imprisoned but `Kansa` would still grant the couple best of life to live and procreate. He assumed that the people would see it as an act of kindness on his part.

Even `Maharishi` was unaware that the eighth child of `Devki` was going to be the chosen one .. `Vishnu's` seventh incarnation — to deliver the lead role of `Krishna Dwaipayana's` epic .. but we are getting ahead of ourselves!

-----

