`Pratigya` (abstract noun) means pledge. 

A difficult pledge is `Kathin Pratigya`. A pledge that seems impossible for a human to undertake is called `Bheeshma Pratigya`. 

-----

# `Pratigya` ..

It was three months that `Dev` didn't hear from the king. Normally, he used to receive a pigeon every week or max biweekly. The last message he had received was for deploying experts to develop an island far East of the kingdom. There was neither economic, nor any strategic value in investing at that end, but `Dev` knew his father had a vision decades in the future. And in any case, it was not his place to judge the wisdom of the king. 

As soon as `Dev` got the word from the king, he dispatched a group of six superior craftsmen who could execute  this simple work, rather quickly.  Simple in the sense that it was not an engineering challenge — it wasn't like building a dam on a running river — just lodging and a small jetty, and may be few other structures. How would such a settlement be seen as king's legacy — `Dev` wondered! He had an inkling, there must be more to it than what meets the eyes! Over twenty some years of his life, `Dev` had learnt that his father always left a lot unsaid between the lines. A man less of words but more of actions. 

For `Dev`, his father was more like a deity. While most kings spent their evenings indulging in wine and women, `Shantanu` made sure he spent that time with young `Dev`. Not only did he not marry after `Ganga` left, he practiced celibacy to make sure `Dev` got his undivided attention. Now twenty years old, `Dev` fully understood how hard was it to lead a celibate life particularly when one's evenings were full of opportunities — or distractions , based on how you see pleasures of life verses focus on your goal. King's consistent efforts, and the divine intelligence of his mother, turned `Dev` into finest young man possible. Tall, handsome, strong and energetic — king felt proud whenever he looked at `Dev` and his people saw a natural leader worth following with their hearts. Being measured of his words, `Shantanu` made sure he never let `Dev` feel the extent of his sacrifices. And truth be told, he saw `Dev` as a gift of `Ganga` — his only love. To him, spending time with `Dev` was the best reminiscences of the past with `Ganga`. He never saw his love for `Dev` as a favor to his son, though the circle around `Dev` reinforced the relationship as a model 'father-son' relationship. Some of them even cited them as reincarnation of `Dashratha and Rama` from `Ramayana`. The virtuous cycle of relationship, once set in, was unstoppable. More son did for his father, more father wanted to do for his son and vice-versa. The question still stayed with `Dev`, how he would ever repay his debt. `Rama` went to jungle for fourteen years, to keep word of his father — what would he do?

---

Not only did `Dev` deploy his finest crew to cause, they could ask as much resources as they needed. They must do the best work possible, and of course, they all must take advice from `Maharishi Parashara`. `Dev` had heard great deal about the `Maharishi` though  he never had a chance to see him in person. He had also heard about the son of `Maharishi` —  `Dwaipayana`  was supposedly a walking encyclopedia. He had hundreds of scriptures memorized at an age when most students start learning the language. More magical was his capacity to reference different scriptures, on the fly, on one single topic. Which meant he could contrast different scriptures to ask which was wrong and what was right !

`Maharishi` requested `Lomaharshana` and `Dwaipayana` be the primary contact for the crew from capital, which they gladly agreed. `Dwaipayana` in particular because this was probably his first assignment outside the walls of `Ashrama`. They quickly set up a camp on the island and mapped out the "would be" settlement. Places earmarked for the lodging, a jetty for porting the boats, fireplaces,  a guest house with high windmill, a high tower and many more. The design of fireplaces was of particular interest to `Maharishi`. He wanted to use them for smoking palm leaves. And yes, there were express instructions to protect all the vegetation as much as possible. No big tree could be uprooted without consent of `Maharishi`. Palm trees in particular were very dear to `Maharishi`. Labour was sourced from the local village. Many `Yogies` volunteered to help in building activities. 

For `Dwaipayana` it was an opportunity to indulge in real life activities and he took deep interest in civil works. More than work, he enjoyed the exposure beyond the boundaries of the `Ashrama`. He realized that the scriptures were grounded in the "actions" of real life. Maybe most `Nyaan Yogies` got to formulating scriptures after a life long experience in the respective fields. For him it was quite the opposite. He got to work after reading the theory. This did enable him relate to what the scriptures actually meant. 

The realization, clubbed with his intense memory, made him speak insights extempore. He quickly became the co-ordinator of all planning and review meetings. Craftsmen as well as workers, wanted to listen to his deep insights, though deep with in, he craved for his roots — his 'never known' mother. Why every child had a mother to go to except for him — he wondered —  and why would `Maharishi` stay silent on this topic. The distance in mind was turning into physical distance. He started staying back on the island. 

---

`Maharishi` could feel that `Dwaipayana` was drifting apart. Is it the adolescence or is it something else? Having deeper knowledge of astrology, and absolute control on him-self; he could see the  waves of his tiny box. The unfortunate aggression from `Kansa` turned into an opportunity to engineer the palm leaves such that they could be mass produced in fire pits, being built by some of the best. The `Ashrama` found a better location. The local people got the work. And `Satyawati` was nearing the next phase of prophesy. He was sure, `Dwaipayana` would soon find his footings. The question that still bothered him was how to tell `Dwaipayana` his mother ?

----

`Satyawati` wondered what happened to the king, and the marriage proposal! Why this sudden disappearance — not even a message! Many times she tried to talk to `Dashraj` who plainly declined to have a conversation on that topic. He was probably hoping that the king would forget `Satyawti` in due course, though something alarmed him inside, that she was special. No man could ever forget even a single encounter with her. 

Many mornings, she waited on the banks hoping to see the king — a futile wait. She did notice a foreign crew started working on the island. Many times she dropped `Loma` and other `Yogies` on the island. A jetty was slowly taking shape. She learnt that the `Ashrama` would probably move to the island. She also noticed many of the villagers started working on the island. They were paid four times the normal wages, and a personal assurance from `Maharishi` to take full care of their families in case anything happened to them on the haunted land.

Days still passed, but nights were difficult. She wondered why she was losing her calm? It was not that she was in some sort of romantic relationship with the king, neither was there any dearth of admirers — her boat was still running full with more passenger waiting than she could accommodate. But something seemed to have fallen apart. On top she couldn't even go to the island anymore, because  there were people camping out there. What would they think of her if she showed up there alone. Many times she thought of going to `Maharishi` to ascertain the meaning of this suspense but then she remembered what `Maharishi` told her — he could predict future, not the present. What happens in the coming hour, day or even a week is always beyond speculation. It's a roll of dice controlled by our sensory reality. 

One thing she was sure — king would never forget her. And the good thing was this gap helped her assess her own cravings — Is it for the wealth and power,  or did she really see a soulmate in `Shantanu`? He was no ordinary man. She could imagine `Shantanu` in her life the way she could never place `Maharishi` — a partner. Someone to share all your life. She wondered what `Shantanu` was doing at this moment. 

The most unfortunate thing was she had nothing to act on — only wait for the next hand of `Bhagya`.

---

With every passing day, `Dev's` worries kept increasing. Finally he sent out a messenger, asking his team at the island to trace the path of the king.  After much inquiries, the crew figured that the king was headed into `Naimisha` forest. A forest known for its `Sanyasins`. That was enough to set `Dev` on course to `Naimisha`. After weeks of track and trace,  he finally met his father. And his eyes watered at the sight as he bowed to touch the feet of his father.. 

King had gotten frail. Grown beard looked old on him. `Dev` understood something was a miss. Few days with the king, he figured that the most important person in the kingdom had lost interest in life. He saw king spending hours in his makeshift tent — sitting alone. Sometimes he would wander into the thick forest in the middle of the night. Other times he wouldn't wake up till afternoon. What is going on? King wanted him to go back to the capital for the kingdom couldn't be left unattended but `Dev` knew he must attend to the king. 

One evening, he was hanging out with king's closest guard - One that had gone to fetch `Dashraj`. In the conversation it came out that this sudden change was after the king met `Dashraj`. No one had any idea, why king met `Dashraj` and what transpired between two of them. Taking an assurance from the king's guard for a daily communication, `Dev` took leave from the king. King was happy that `Dev` was taking his responsibility to the kingdom seriously. Only `Dev` knew that the only reason he was leaving was to meet `Dashraj`. What exactly did he tell the king that made the king lose interest in life.

---
