`Shantanu` was left alone. More he tried to stop `Ganga` more quickly she wanted to leave. She pointed to the king that he can't stop the flow of water, and time. But the life did stop pulsing for `Shantanu`. He lost faith in reality. If he, despite being a king, couldn't retain his love, what was the point of all the wealth and the armies. At times, he wanted to renounce the world but `Dev` was too young to handle the politics. He didn't want his son to pay the price of his messed up love life. He heard people talk that the king had to pay the price of unorthodox marriage. They said it was the result of not following the laid down rituals. A king's wedding should have happened as per the protocol. The politics with in his circles got trickier as many big houses wanted their girls wedded into the monarchy. They had many lobbyists, trying to pursue in merits of never keeping the crown without a queen. Saying a ‘no’, to a proposal, was always a ‘lose-lose’ situation. But no one felt like `Ganga`. And nothing clicked like she did. 

He tried to get out of grief in hunting and drinking but nothing worked. The only thing that made him lose himself was the work. Work turned into passion for him. He didn't understand that it was the `Karm Yoga` that was pulling him out of separation anxiety, and plugging him back to the real world, but he could feel the presence of something magical. More he focused on work, more interesting it became. People slowly forgot his marriage debacle and they started appreciating the tireless efforts he put in getting the complex balance of power into absolute equilibrium. First he handled the problem of `Asuras` — drove them out of his land, into their own dedicated kingdom. All without using a single arrow — through endless negotiations and diplomacy. Many `Asura` leaders' deaths were attributed to the king but he knew the truth. He never authorised any assassination. 

Next, he took the works started by `Ganga` to fruition. Every city and village was connected through bridges. A vast irrigation system was set up. `Dev` led all these developmental efforts. And lastly, he made sure no one in his kingdom slept hungry, without a roof or without proper clothes. The three basics were the responsibility of the state. As the prince turned into a flawless statesman, the king, finally thought taking time off for himself. He wanted to spend more time visiting regions around `Yamuna`, for he thought he spent more time on `Ganges`. And he wanted to meet grass root people — to understand their lives — live like them — face the pleasures and pains of life like a commoner.

Having made sure that the kingdom was on auto-pilot, and `Dev` was fully plugged in, `Shantanu` handed over the reins to the prince and took on this long journey to the farthest reaches of his state. Part of his motivation was to see if `Dev` could run the kingdom in his absence. And the other part was obviously to let go the responsibilities and live his own life for whatever was left of it after `Ganga`. As part of his journey, he paid visits to many `Ashramas` and `Gurukuls` to earn good will as well to find the deeper meaning of life and it's purpose.

Many months into the journey, king learnt the people were not as happy as he was told. There was rampant rise of debate. Most of his local representatives were spending enormous time (and effort), on rituals rather than putting in hard work to resolve the problems of common people. He was not sure how to handle this problem. He was caught into duality. What is the right path? He had heard that `Maharishi Parāśara` advocated another path to peace. A path focused more on `Karma` than investing all the time in pleasing the deities. And it had been a while he visited `Madhu` forest. A part of his kingdom, that still had infestation of `Asuras`. It had to be a clandestine visit — he didn't want to shake up the power structure of `Naad Ypgoies` around the monarchy without first having good connect with `Maharishi` and a deeper look at his ideology. He and only few of his chosen body guards. 

As the king was mulling over theses plans, a pigeon brought the message of `Maharishi`. The plans precipitated into actions. King must rally the help that `Mahrishi` needed, but first he must meet the `Yogi` face to face — to understand the situation on the ground.

---

King and his chosen men, set up a camp many miles before `Yamuna` in a part of the forest that was rarely visited by locals. Forest was dense, such that even the fire smoke was beyond anyone's easy notice. On his way, he was told that the `Ashrama` of `Maharishi Parāśara` was just across the river. He had heard about the philosophy of `Maharishi`,  and his support for scribing the knowledge,  rather than spending too much time on the rituals. He wanted to meet `Maharishi` to discuss his own conundrum but the other side of `Yamuna` was beyond his official territory - claimed by variety of `Asura` lords. He had heard that `Ugrasen` brought peace to this part of the frontiers with help from `Maharishi Parasara` though he never had seen `Ugrasen`, and this frontier was least of his problems. He didn't know that `Kansa` had put his father and siblings into house arrest though being out of his jurisdiction, it wasn't on his political radar anyways.

No one objected to people crossing state boundaries but for a king, it could be deemed as an act of aggression - it could trigger a political situation and turn into an unnecessary conflict that he wanted to avoid at any rate. But he did want to see `Maharishi` and he had heard about `Krishna` - the magical son of `Maharishi`.

To avoid unnecessary conflict, `Shantanu` decided to dress up like a commoner and cross the river with normal commuters. Not even his body guards. The next morning, he advised his bodyguards to stay put and he rode his horse to the bank of `Yamuna`. He tied his  horse a mile before the docks and walked like a peasant to the docks. It was not uncommon for `Shantanu` to visit parts of his state dressed like a farmer or a blacksmith. It was a common practice for kings (and ministers) to mix with masses to get a pulse on the "state of the union". The only difference here was he was heading to an uncharted territory. In a way, it was exciting for `Shantanu` for he was tired of the security cordon that came with a position of power. He wanted to feel unsecured, and unhinged.

# The desire ..

As the luck would have it, `Satyawati's` boat reached this side of the bank as soon as `Shantanu` arrived there. A sandalwood fragrance captured the bank. Deers and peacocks flocked to the bank along with waiting commuters to get a chance on `Satyawati's` magical boat. King was mesmerized by the scene. He couldn't have imagined the beauty and serenity of the situation. Being dressed like a commoner, he too got into the line to get on the boat.

The ride took more than an hour but for `Shantanu`, the time stood still. He was almost staring at `Satyawati` and when she started singing, with the waves of `Yamuna`, he was teleported to another world. First time in years, he wanted to fall in love. He wanted to keep listening to `Satyawati's` folk songs rooted in morning `raagas`. He had never thought music could be so evoking.

As the boat reached the village wharf, commuters started disembarking. `Shantanu` kept sitting in the boat. Someone nudged him that it was time to get down. People were throwing the fare in a bucket, expressing their thanks to the crew for a beautiful morning ride and hurried to their daily chores. `Shantanu` got up and without a word, he dropped all the gold coins he was carrying in the bucket. 

He hadn't even walked few yards that he heard `Satyawati`. As he turned back, she was getting off the boat — Sir, looks like you left all your wealth for us!  She had gold coins in her hand and she wanted to return them back. 

These pieces of metal are nothing for the experience I had this morning ! — said the disguised king — maybe you can give me a ride back in the evening for I have nothing left on me. And he turned and walked away from the bank. Another minute there, and he thought he would fall for the beautiful woman. She is definitely not of this village - he thought, maybe not even a Earthling.

Where are you heading to? — asked `Satyawati` — still not sure if she should take so much Gold. She was sure `Dashraaj` would be pleased, but something in her felt that this wasn't a common commuter. 

I am going to see `Maharishi Parāśara`. Would you be kind enough to point me the direction. I heard he lives nearby — said `Shantanu`.

The Ashram is half a mile to the North — `Satyawati` quickly added — and I will be here waiting for you to get you back across `Yamuna`. And she raised her hand. She felt as if `Maharishi's` prophecy was taking shape. This is the man that she was waiting for. Despite his middle age, he had an aura of a statesman. `Satyawati` was drawn to him. The fact that he was rich and he left everything he had for her was a sign that she was looking for.

As for king, a desire took birth. A feeling he had lost after `Ganga`, and the one he thought he forgot after years of being obsessed with his work. He wanted to live this new desire. After a long time, he asked something for himself. He might get that from `Yamuna` what he lost in `Ganges` - he thought, as he walked to the `Ashrama` ...  but how? Is it destiny playing another trick with him? One thing he was sure — it was real and he could see that in `Satyawati's` eyes. She wanted something more than all the gold he could give!

------

