# 7.0

`Maharish` saw `Maitrea` as he stepped into  `Ashrama`. He was watering the trees at the entrance of congregation. `Maitrea` was much younger, but `Maharishi` treated him like a friend - not a senior student. `Maitrea`, wondering why `Maharishi` missed morning procession, asked with a curious smile - hope all well! He had barely finished greetings when`Maharishi` asked ...

> `Maitrea` if God is kind and loving , why is there misery in the world?

`Maitrea` understood `Maharishi` must have gone for an overnight `Samadhi` and something must be on his mind. He figured `Maharishi` needed an unbiased opinion - a fair coin-toss as an answer. Instead of asking the context, he spoke his mind - `Maharishi`, if you mean `Bramh` as God , then you only taught us that `Bramh` offers appropriate opportunity to every being. That opportunity is our little world around us. It is for us to choose what we make of it.

`Maharishi` smiled. Sometimes, clarity comes in a jiffy. `Maitrea's` answer meant the opportunity to 'write' was not uniquely his.  He felt relief that it was not solely his responsibility! If text was the next big thing on path to evolution of consciousness - like fire or wheel -  many more would join the cause. At the same time, he felt anxious - What if `Asuras` were already writing books - to spread anarchy! What if they reached masses first ?  Common people, likes of `Matsya`, were just a nudge away from losing faith. He knew innovation always had the first-mover advantage. The races that adopted wheels to make chariots, flourished. Those who adopted iron hardened in fire  made much better weapons  and literally killed the ones stuck with stone. He realized there was no way to stay still in this world. We always need to act. It was even more important at this juncture because high priests had already labeled scribing demonic. No one would be surprised if demons actually took to writing books.

There were some personal reasons holding `Maharishi` back - stopping him from going all in. He deemed his interest in ‘text’ might be perceived as being anti-establishment. He didn't think he was cynical, but he had uncomfortable positions with `Naad Yogies` — on them turning into gatekeepers of the knowledge. He was not sure if building a parallel channel of communication was good because it was good to his class - `Nyaan Yogies`; or was it truly a righteous path? Nor was he free from self-doubt — was he inclined towards ‘writing’ to satisfy his own ambition, or was it really for the greater good. Is he trying to burn the system just because he had the advantage, thanks to his early training?  Or was it righteous! And he didn't want to make the same mistake as his father did - exposing an idea before it's time!

<!-- markdownlint-disable-next-line -->
<div style="padding-left:40px;font-size:0.9em;">

Uncountable impulses live in the past or the future - a better word is continuum - a sub conscious realm of thought. After intense back and forth, they fructify into one actionable. An action must be taken irrespective of dualities of thought - to bind them into a knot - to create a bond. When our action organs engage, it is the present[^present] of `Bramh`. We act to weave the knots.

We think in past! We imagine in future! But we can't act anywhere outside the tiny window of the present. Present is the scope[^scope]. No one can ever hold a moment without actions. If the actions are driven because of desires, we ourselves get caught in the knots they make. If they are righteous - not driven by desires - the knots don't hold us back.

> ‘Present’ is the only window to engage with continuum (`Bramh`) and the invocation is ‘sensory’ in nature. The question really is how to turn this sensory invocation[^senses] into worthy action  - a `Karmik` reality[^karmik]. How to make sure actions are righteous ?

</div>

It was time to set the wheels rolling. A new set of basic terms must be written down and embedded into every instance of conscious thinking, every social contract — be it an individual, a group or even a kingdom — every single format of human organization. Time was ripe for a new narrative (to supplement `Ramayana`) but who would do that? How could someone crystallize the righteous path into written words. How and who will elucidate `Karm Yoga` to the masses? Maybe, it was a feat that be accomplished over many generations — like a relay race. Not only that, the path must be told as a compelling story that takes the collective consciousness onto a new charter — just the way `Ramayana` did in last eon. Stories, he thought, were the best way to circumvent a debate for they weave the context. But the story must be tested in physical reality. Because truth is what actually happens in physical reality, and only truth has the staying power!

`Maharishi` felt as if he wanted to create a little intervention in the fabric reality - to see how the things shape up ! Let `Bramh` itself play the narrative and have someone record everything. 

## 7.1

The perspective that `Maharish` had about his father `Sakti Muni` was largely from his mother. `Bramhrishi` rarely shared his feelings about his son. It was too painful for him to revisit that fateful morning and good times that led to the debacle. Only thing he always exuded was his own failure to stop `Sakti` take the path he took. He wished he was there that morning to sort the matter without anger crossing over both sides. And he wished `Vishwamitra` was kinder to `Sakti` - because `Sakti` was his devotee. 

`Vishwamitra` - one of the seven `Bramhrishis` - was not born of `Bramha`. He reached this title through sheer hard work. The fame to his name was applications of fire. Fire was discovered long back for cooking but no one ever thought a special type of fire could forge metals. His most precious discovery was gold. No one knew how to make gold except for `Vishwamitra`, but everyone knew he realized these powers on account of extreme penance. The legend says he spent one thousand years alone in his spiritual journey - to unlock the power of Sun. Legend also says that `Vishwamitra` instigated `Kalmashpada` to kill `Sakti`.

<!-- markdownlint-disable-next-line -->
<div style="padding-left:40px;font-size:0.9em;">

`Vishwamitra` orchestrated the events that led to `Sakti's` death.

`Sakti`, encountered King `Kalmashapada's`  chariot in the forest and refused to move aside. This led to an argument, during which `Kalmashapada` lashed out at `Sakti` with his whip. Enraged, `Sakti` cursed the king to become a `Rakshasa` (demon).

`Vishwamitra`, who was `Vasishtha's` rival, saw this incident and was pleased. He then manipulated the situation by instructing another `Rakshasa` named `Kinkara` to enter `Kalmashapada's` body, causing the curse to take effect.

The next day, the transformed `Kalmashapada`, now with the nature of a `Rakshasa`, went to `Sakti's`  hermitage seeking revenge. He killed `Sakti` and ate him, also killing his  brothers.

`Vishwamitra's` motivation for this plot was his long-standing rivalry with `Vasishtha`. By orchestrating `Sakti's` death, `Vishwamitra` sought to harm `Vasishtha` . This event was part of a series of conflicts between the two sages, which had begun with a dispute over a divine cow `Kaamdhenu` and escalated into a power struggle

</div>

Only `Vaśiṣṭha` knew that `Sakti` had deep appreciation for `Vishwamitra` for the work he did in metals. And he himself wanted to learn how to forge Gold. His ideology of `Karm Yoga` was inspired by innovation.


Sometimes resolutions show up out of thin air. It was one such moment. `Maharishi` saw a clear path forward if only he vowed to not scribe any (more) books himself — with his name as the author! If he took this call on himself, then clearly he was not acting out of hope for personal gratification. No one knows if such ‘vows’ have any material impact, but they do purify one's own soul. And we do see similar vows these days. For example `Satoshi Nakamoto` is a pseudonym. No one knows who wrote the white paper and software for the bitcoin. In a way, by putting a pseudonym, the real author withheld her name from one of the biggest intervention of this century. `Maharishi` was convinced, true `Karma` must "literally" be self-less.

A plethora of action items shaped up in `Maharishi's` mind. The first obvious task was to determine the perfect planetary alignment to bring a worthy heir to life. A time must be determined to enable the universe find a writer who could reap truth just the way paddy sowed at right time bears rice. The world might know him as his son, but he would be the son of knowledge.  He would translate his ideas into text. He would mark the exact center where evil meets the good and both play a perfect dance of life. A balance to ride the waves of joy and grief. Something that could show the path to peace, to a disoriented society. And pull them from both excessive darkness and excessive light. An island in the river of time, between two banks that never seem to meet each other — `Dvaipayana` — born on an island!
Most of the actions are driven by duality - formation of a chiral knot. We try to create a mirror image. We fill up the reality with the missing pieces of puzzle to create a perfect image of our thought. For example if one likes left wing politics; that is what they want to implement in physical world - bigger governance for bigger regulation. A far right libertarian, on the other hand, wants to make government as small as possible. A player wants everyone to play the sport of their liking. A writer wants everyone to read their work. The mechanics of it is fairly straightforward - our physical reality is reconfigured from the underlying narrative our consciousness is exploring - actions are the means to do so.

In a way, the actions are to test what is a right fit, and what is not - reconfiguration. Like we slowly take a small sip of coffee - to check if it is hot (or not). After many trials and consequent feedback loops, we develop a right routine. The actions done at this stage are an outcome of a resolve -  a correct objective assessment of the context to bridge the gaps in reality . An experienced (well-trained) response is said to be out of a ¨resolve¨ - it is called `Nishchya`- Like a surgeon's call to cut open a patient's heart. In `Vaidik` parlance, the `Nishchaya` is an outcome of `Yazna` - repetitive actions.

In Sanskrit such an action is called `Nishchyatmak` - beyond doubts. The intent of the action represents the resolve - `Nishchaya`.

This is where we need to feel and appreciate others' point of view. Compassion is thus a characteristic of the present and like `Karmas`, compassion lives in this very moment. Future is well-known — ultimately we all die, the important question is how we live our present. Because "present" is the only accessible ‘door’ to the future (and the past) — it is where the spotlight of consciousness is shining bright — this moment. In fact, it may be confusing to use the words ‘future’ or ‘past’. An easier way to say this is:

Spending a night at the island always sharpened his thinking. The `Samadhi` at the cave, helped `Maharishi` conclude the root cause of misery in (his) modern world. It was that everyone held their point of view ‘sacrosanct’. People were not even ready to look at the world from others' perspective, while they wanted everyone to fully understand theirs. He felt, in the name of debate, the civilized world adopted the same old  animal behaviour. We simply replaced muscle power with power of spoken words. And this was exactly opposite to what `Vaśiṣṭha` had envisaged for a civil society. Compassion was the very basis of new design, and it was exact opposite to current notion of debate. No one wanted to say "you are right" ; the question was always to check "am I not right?"

Being an astrologer, was a unique gift. He had the ability to see the ‘present’ from people's perspective.  If you couldn't see present of this world from someone's standpoint, what chance would you have to see their past, or their future? To know someone's future (or past), you got to know their present first, exactly the way they see it.

> The key revelation, however  was, if we attain the ability to see the world exactly as someone else sees it then we also get to see “who we are” from their standpoint. It should not be a surprise because if you could use someone's eyes, first thing you would like to see is your own face. Why? Because the fundamental quest [^quest] is "who am I?"? And unfortunately our eyes can't see our own face. Our ears can't hear our own heartbeat. We must ascribe to another set of sensory apparatus to see who we are!

Our sensory apparatus is designed to see everything other than that we claim our own. In essence, we can never understand the limitations of our ‘point of view’ unless we truly see it from others' standpoint. The problem is, our sensory apparatus (eyes, ears, nose, tongue and skin) doesn't know how to enable this ability. Our senses are designed to see external things — outwards, whereas seeing our own self is ‘metaphorically’ inwards. Since we can't turn our senses upside down, the only way available to perceive “who we are?” is through subscribing to others' senses. And this access is available only At this moment, and only through compassion. Why only? Because compassion generates feedback from others. For example, no one would look into your eyes straight if you did something trivial - not so good. Even if you seek formal feedback, the answer normally is a "thanks" without making an eye contact. On the other hand, if you did something perfect, the feedback is spontaneous. You can see it in their eyes. You don't need to seek feedback - neither they need to say a thanks. In a way, the other person is letting you use their eyes - to show you what they really think of you.

At that moment with `Matsya`, `Maharishi` saw himself through her eyes. Though it was a brief meetup, and unplanned — she was neither educated nor elite — but she was an embodiment of a commoner's hopes from the highest order of human wisdom. One who knew nothing to one who knew it all.  Her purity and intelligence acted like an untainted  mirror to `Maharish's` soul. He saw in her vantage the path he was on and what masses expected him to accomplish. They expected him not to win arguments with other `Yogies`, or to burn the `Rakshsas` to revenge his clan. They rather wanted him to pave a “path to peace” for the commoners. Because while the elite class of `Naad Yogies` were busy solving greater problems, the masses suffered the untold miseries of life that never featured in any narrative - old or new.

He saw he must rise to make a difference in the lives of ordinary people, and being the sole heir of `Bramhrishi` - the keeper of knowledge — that was his destiny. He must rise above the never-ending conflicts, and the petty prejudices of his own class, and must indulge in actions that the masses expected him to render. He understood the idea of `Karm Yoga` though it was still beyond articulation. He also felt the extreme weight of the responsibility he retained, for the privileges of being `Vaśiṣṭha's` grandson must be paid back to the realm.

For a moment, he missed his grandfather. He wished `Bramhrishi` was there with him, to guide him through this maze — to navigate him onto a righteous path!

## 7.2

`Maharishi` concluded there was only one way to enable people see beyond what they deemed righteous — beyond their own point of view: add the ability to see oneself 'objectively' in every human being — as if they were seeing themselves from a distance — just the way they see others. He named this ability - `Atmoupamyen Drishti`. In Sanskrit `Drishti` means the vision, and `Atmoupamyen` means looking at self from a distance.

He wondered would he act the way he did if he saw himself from `Kalmashpada's` vantage. Quite possibly the monster king and his accomplices that grotesque morning, were equally scared now, and remorseful of their deeds in earlier life. Did they deserve a pardon? — or must they be tested in the firetrap ? `Maharishi` understood that one's righteous actions are determined by the conditions and the surrounding actors, in their physical reality, but most people have hard time understanding what their "tiny-box" expected of them. The question was how to enable this ability in a commoner? It wouldn't be reasonable to expect everyone gain expertise in astrology (like himself) and have the `Yougik` capabilities. There must be a simpler method!

As he dug deeper into this thought, he realized there was a simple method. He thought — people around us always give us clues, on our behaviour. Normally, they try to restrict their feedback if we are not to their expectations, but they shower full feedback if we do something good for them. Doing something good for others is what we know as service (`Sewa`). He concluded that service to others unlocks the feedback cycle. Through this feedback, anyone (even a common person) may glean a lot of information about himself. In other words, ‘service’ is "one" path that enables `Atmoupamyen Drishti`. The next obvious question was how to enable service orientation in the masses?

Since the idea of selfless service (to gain feedback about oneself) was beyond natural human behaviour, and quite the opposite to evolutionary selfish impulse (of `Swadhisthana` and `Manipurka` Chakras), the obvious place where this model could be provisioned was heart (`Anahata`). Kindness, gratitude, indebtedness, love are the traits (`vritties`) of heart chakra. These traits develop in humans listening to the stories (`Samskaras`), right from their childhood. They enable them put themselves among ghosts and good, thieves and givers, haters and lovers — in essence they define morality. Human cosmos has more stories than the stars and planets. More stories a child is exposed, more vivid her imagination. This is where service orientation must be nurtured. Service orientation to enable them see themselves objectively and hence an option to determine what is right set of actions for them.

`Maharishi` didn't realize that this simple idea was the basis of `Karm Yoga`. In `Karm Yoga` we start with selfless service, beyond desires of personal gratification, to enable us understand who we are. Since these actions enable us to know who we are, we may simply say, these actions are driven by our inner self - compassion!

This ability, he fathomed, was as important as the natural impulses of hunger and reproduction. For example, when he felt the compassion for `Matsya`, he realized the feeling he had, was more than natural tension of sexes. Love for sex and love for the offspring, are something well-known to every human. They are pre-built into every core including those of animals. Being able to feel for someone, beyond these two basic constructs is compassion. And he recalled what his grandfather always taught him. Compassion comes when `Heart Chakra` opens up. When pathway of compassion opens up, the conflicting views of others get as personal as one's own point of view. But having compassion alone is not enough. Compassion must translate into actions. Actions that lead to self-less service in reality; and thus a real self evaluation based on the feedback of others. In essence - compassion renders us access to someone else's sensory apparatus. You may see yourself - at least in bits and pieces.

## 7.3

`Maharishi` understood, every human needed `Atmoupamyen` vision. The question was how to impart this ability to every human being. Adding the messages of compassion led service into every scripture was one possibility. In fact, these messages were already there in every spoken scripture. The problem was scriptures were locked under wraps in a close network of people, or were protected for a privileged class. How would this knowledge reach everyone? The simple answer was ‘written text’. It was the only way to open the flood gates of information to the masses. Opening up this channel, he thought, would be the biggest act of self-less service to mankind! He understood he was uniquely qualified to do this job. Having learnt speech as well as scribing right from his childhood positioned him well for the pursuit.  In a way, this was his `Karma`.

This also meant everyone must be able to at least read (if not write). A long journey — he thought, but well worth trying. And that was the reason he was keen on the format of the written word - It must be a narrative. From his experience of `Vishun Purana`, he figured that story telling was a superior art. But it was a ‘vocal’ art-form. It must be realized in written format. Something that attracted people — young and old. People remembered `Ramayana` by heart, because it was a narrative, but masses didn't remember other didactic scriptures at all! Scriptures had to be forcefully recited by `Naad Yogies` to give them perpetuity. Thus, he concluded,  the new knowledge must be ‘scribed’ in `Ramayana's` format. It must be self-descriptive, and intense enough to capture the public imagination. It must be so gripping that masses are pulled into learning the reading skills.

He wondered, how might one scribe a story! It was never done before. Someone will need to define all the characters. A plot must be built in writing. All the things that come naturally while telling a story verbally, would need to be defined. And the words so carefully crafted that people feel immersed in a virtual reality.

There was a significant risk. How would reciters view the idea of scribing a story? Will people read a story rather than listening to it? Will it have similar impact? The unknowns were bogging him down, but at the same time, he felt an excitement. A resolution was taking a definite shape. It not only paced his breath but also his limping feet walking towards the `Ashrama`. He wanted to sit down and scribe these ideas himself on the palm leaf still held in his hand.

Excitement always leads to urgency. Now was the time - he thought - because as the populations were increasing (and spreading). It would be lot harder in the future. At the same time he was skeptical — what if the written texts got into hands of `Asuras`? His mind still a victim of doubts. Internal churn was still on. For example, Astrology was a powerful tool. He wanted to make sure the access was only to the ones who deserved it. But who might get to decide? No wonder, `Naad Yogies` thought the act of writing was demonic. Once you wrote the words down, it would almost be impossible to keep a track of the readers. A book has its own journey. Ideas could reach the darker side. And it could very well turn the balance of power — take the world into uncharted territories — he feared.

Again, he used the new-found tool to assess this fear. How would a young `Asura` react to the idea of restricted access? Wouldn't limiting the access push her further on the anarchic path? If, despite being a `Maharishi`, he himself didn't trust the other side, how were they expected to trust the `Vaidik vision`? Not only trust, the ‘written text’ was an opportunity to win the hearts of other side. `Asuras` were barred from participating in rituals. A book could be read offline, without having to show up at `Vaidik` ceremonies. Let them see the light at a place of their comfort, and be a part of human progress — together. A state where multiplicity of ideas could co-exist. People could write without fear of persecution and at the same time read something obtuse to their own vantage. But then, hard coding the knowledge into written text, and making it publicly available, without the context, without the rigor needed to bear the ‘knowledge’ could be harmful to the masses.

`Maharishi Parāśara` was sold on the idea of `textification`, but he was held back by apparent pitfalls. He was waiting for a sign. Back and forth - churn in the continuum - something must be done - an action must fructify. Universe must lead him to the right path. `Bramh` must give him a clue for he was at a stalemate with his own mind.

**Notes and Stuff:**

[^present]: What exactly is the present?
<!-- markdownlint-disable-next-line -->
- Would you call yourself in present when you are sleeping?  Or in deep meditations. Meditation, by definition is holding up our actions organs while we are awake. That is the reason it is impossible to hold our mind in present in a meditation. We can be in present only through indulging in actions.
- Meditation is useful to access the continuum, if only we could hold our thought on a specific item - it takes immense practice and in `Vaidik` parlance it is called a `Samadhi`.
- Even the sense of time is with actions. Time is measured as a period of inaction (meditation) between two events (actions). The hourly bell of the pendulum. The secondly clicks of a watch - time is the period of inaction between two beeps. If all watches were to stay still - in same state - even those that tick in our body and mind (and in our computers), would we know the passage of time?  Time is thus the duration of thought between two acts. It is our action-less submersion into the continuum. Actions then appear as events - they themselves are timeless. No wonder we lose sense of time when we are busy in actions.
- The continuity of the present is an illusion. We are a good story tellers to ourselves. We weave random action events into a narrative. The events might occur in past or in future - our narratives gives them an order. They define the objects and characters available to us in the "scope". That's the reason we never feel discontinuity after ten hours of sleep - even after six months of coma. Our brains simply line up the events to describe a story.
- In essence, the meaning of the word "present" is the active state. In between we dwell in past or future. Thought is the worm-hole to move to the past -  to edit the narrative captured in our mind. And thus there is no notion of "present" in our action less sleep. `Dwaipayana` wrote in third chapter of `Gita` > Nahi Kashchit Khshanam Api, Jatu tishthati Akaramkrit !  >> No one gets to stay without actions even for a moment .

---

[^scope]: Scope:
<!-- markdownlint-disable-next-line -->
- In computer programming, the scope is a block of code where we may access a variable, a function or a constant; to do some action with it. The memory where the said objects are stored is released back to the pool as soon as objects go out of scope. In other words scope is the present for a Computer. In strongly typed languages (such as Rust), objects of same type are allowed to interact. For example, you can only add a integer to another as long as they both are in scope. You can't add an int to a float. In other words, present always comes with rules. In fact, the gift is set of rules. `Siva` (intelligence) is the rule set.
- There are always some new twists whenever one indulges in the physical reality! — the scope. That is the reason one could never predict the next hour or next day — though predicting events say ten years from now is possible. And that is what makes this world such an interesting place!
- All prediction, whether they are ten years hence, or a hundred years, or a multi generational prophecy, may happen with their own nuances, but those wrinkles of the evolving rule set are insignificant at this point in time. At this time we are lost in the nuances of the present — the tiniest (but comprehensive) sensory details, as in color, smell and touch. These sensory overlays, in our current moment are important because our involuntary reactions (feedback) determine if the reality we create is worth spending our time or not. These sensory experiences, however, don't change the future - they only effect the experience.

---

[^senses]: It is very easy to understand sensory realm with an example:
<!-- markdownlint-disable-next-line -->
- Let us use the sense of vision (eyes) with a mirror. Let us say there is a straight mirror. When we see in the mirror we see ourselves. We are in a dual universe. We see our replica, and we believe the replica is exactly like us. Let us say we bend this mirror. As we bend this mirror at 90 degree, we see two images of us. A left side view and a right side view. If we bend even more we see four, eight, ten images of ourselves. If we keep on bending further the number of images become infinite - uncountable.
<!-- markdownlint-disable-next-line -->
- What happens if we close the mirror onto ourselves - like we suspended inside a spherical mirror? We are in sensory invocation of eyes. There are infinite views. The images we see are our own projections - there is nothing else. Everything that we see now is a vision based sensory invocation of our own conscious. Now imagine same with audio , taste , smell and touch. Everything that we perceive is an infinite projection of our own conscious. This is known as “sensory invocation”. The question then becomes how do we see ourselves in this sensory invocation. The simple answer is - we don't need to. Because our sensory universe is a projection of us. This is the basis of the verse `Ahm Bramh asmi` - means I am `Bramh`. In a way our conscious is locked in a bubble of five senses folded on to themselves. Is there a way to perceive beyond this bubble ? See the formation and demise of this bubble ? All those experience are with in our reach. `Karm Yoga` is a path to unlock the reality bubble while being in it at eternal peace. Keep in mind that "sensory reality" is local. We may extend it with tools such as telecommunication or scientific observations, but sensory reality is essentially a tiny-box. Think of it as a really addictive VR headset. There is a misconception that we are locked into this sensory reality. That is simply to say that we are addicted to it because it is the most beautiful interface ever created. But we have choice to get out of it when ever we want. For example, we naturally take it off when we sleep, or we are in a `Samadhi`. We can learn to go beyond senses through meditation - `Dhyana`. Many of our modern life problems are that we are too much addicted to our senses just like the ill effects of excessive use of smart screens. That is the reason, sleeping full eight hours daily and doing some meditation have instant beneficial effects. Not only this, we also have many choices for the interface - just the way Mac interface is different from Windows — Linux has hundreds of interfaces including a pure terminal mode. And also, we can change our Avatars in this interface - our appearance, hair, the way we meet and greet — everything is optional and highly customizable. A proper understanding of this interface is almost essential to work effectively in this realverse. There is another misconception — that giving up this interface is good for us — nothing can be farther from truth. Our actions (`Karma`) are in this physical reality. The choice of interface or reducing the screen time is only to make us more effective at our `Karma` — not to give up actions.
---

[^karmik]: Knowing `Ahm Bramh Asmi` is just the beginning.
<!-- markdownlint-disable-next-line -->
- This knowledge gets us to momentary peace, but the questions remains how to see past our sensory invocation. We can choose to stay in our sensory invocation and enjoy it like being in a metaverse, but sometimes the desire to understand this all becomes prevalent.
- This is the beginning of quest to know "who am I". We want to know the entire universe because we want to understand who we are! `Gita` says, once we realize absolute peace in our sensory universe ( means full control over our senses), we need to deploy these senses in "actions", exactly the way this sensory universe (our tiny box) demands of us. Once we accomplish an equilibrium in this sensory metaverse, the "righteous actions" become easily available to us. These actions are (naturally) beyond desires. In a way, "what we want (desires) and what we must do (righteous actions) become identical. There is no duality at this stage. In such a state of `Karmik reality` we are riding the waves of otherwise cyclic nature of our tiny box.
- Such a state is `Nirvana` — the final goal, where peace and righteous actions are part of our nature, and we clearly see who we are and what we stand for. The only (and real) battle is aligning our "desires" with the "righteous" so that they are congruent. `Krishna` says to accomplish this superimposition, we do need deeper understanding of what our desires are, and what are the right thing to do . This knowledge is known as `Buddhi Yoga` (being connected with our intelligence). Thus, the goal of `Buddhi Yoga` is to accomplish righteous actions with natural ease — `Karm Yoga`. Both `Nyaan Yoga` - quest for knowledge , and `Bhakti Yoga` - extreme devotion for `Atma`, lead to rise of `Buddhi Yoga` before finally sublimating into `Karm Yoga`. This idea was later ascribed by `Dwaipayana` in third chapter of `Bhagvad Gita`. He says

> Yah [one who] Tu [but] Indriyani [the senses] Mansa [ by the mind] Niyamya [regulating] Arabhte [initiates] Arjuna [Arjuna];
>>
> Karm-Indriyaih [with the active work organs] Karm Yogam [ritual of action] Asaktah [without attachment, someone beyond sensory consumption] Sah [s/he] Vishishyate [excels]
> >
> One who initiates (actions) by regulating the senses with mind ; engaged in Karm Yoga -ritual of actions, with active work organs, and detached to sensory consumption; such a person is a special one.

---

[^quest]: At the most fundamental level, all our quest is to know "who we are" , we rise the heights of mountains and sink to depths of oceans to figure out who we are? We explore ends of space and also meditate in our own hearts to know who we are!
