- Add a graphic and discussion on `Atmik` Shakti  vs community under Daivy Sampad.
- Close the "Duality" with a conversation back to Matrix. 
- Express the idea of SAR in Blockchain metaphor.As to why millions of copies of the same species take place. Only some of them will complete the Yajna. Most wont even start. Many will go in various directions and create a new thing. In fact science is alwaya like this. Most of the discoveries happen without intent. 
- Hath Yoga is the language of conscious agents. The syllables `Mantras` are given so that we remember them just like the alphabet. And Mudras are given so that we indulge into a daily action on the routine. It is NOT necessary to learn this language just like you don't learn all the languages. You learn only what you need to do. But knowing that a language exists for a very specific purpose is a great thing. Might delve into the idea that the languages are actually made for a specific purpose. 
-  Time - Everyone has infinite possibilities but time is constrained so that you can do only one  thing. The thing for which you are given a `Samskaras` - The dorment `Svabhava`.
-  Bring Nix language in to define why manifestation is instantaneous. 
-  Introduce `Samskara` as the core services. Reincarnation - as reboot is an opportunity to upgrade the core services based on the life long `Yajna` you did. Think of this update or reboot in the cloud. You can start a session from any device. Thus the physical harware doesnt matter as long as it complies with the basic minimum reqiurements to start the session. Most of the compute and memory intensive ops are anyway happening in the cloud. 
-  Using `Prema` - Intense longing to take the Kundalini to `Anahta` such that Shakti falls for Siva. 
-
-
-  Why manifestation ?  - Becasuse knowledge has the energy for actions but it needs manifestated things as instruments to accomplish those actions. 
-
- How to manifest a conscious agent - The best way for knowledge is to fully hide itself. `Kundalini` symbolysis a snake wrapped around knoledge such that knowldge is completely hidden. With this set up - a tiny accidental manifestation - say just one cell - will explode into trillons - those trillions of cells in different format (spicies) will go on to build the universe. The way intelligence acts at this stage when it lacks all information about the knowlledge (because of lack of manifestation) is it creates very many shapes - in hope that a piece of knowledge might get decryted . That is the reason every spicies has millions of copies. Each with minute change. Only one of them will manifest.
-
- Panch Bhoota - With smart phone we entered into a new era. Up till now we used to develop the smart software for the computer ; on computer. We also built some non intelligent devices. Now we are computer is building smarter devices. So smart that the users have no clue how it works. But this is not new. We have many things that are as essential to our existence as the smart phones but we have no clue or we pay no attention how these things work. For example water has a complete life cycle. We drink , wash and pretty much live on water but we pay no attention. We have no clue how it came to be so abundant on earth. Just like we have no idea how smart speakers got so smart. Such a universally essential phenomenon becomes a fundamental element. I think for kids born after say 2000 , internet is an essential element - as much important as the water or fire - probably more. 
-
- Bindu is a tiny spoylight. Intelligence focuses only where the spotlight shines. More complex Samskara means the spotlight is stuck in the bottom two chakras. How do you take it up ? Through Mantras Mudras or by engaging in natural actions.
