<center><h1>Two Yogies</h1></center>
<center>
<figure>
    <audio
       controls
       src="./whoAmI.mp3">
          Your browser does not support the
          <code>audio</code> element.
    </audio>
</figure>
<h2>Episode 1 </h2>
</center>

In Hindu scriptures, we have something called nada yoga, yoga of recital and chanting. All the sounds that we receive through our  ears ,  the  sounds of the cosmos , of the world, or the room we are in;  these sounds are called `Aahta` , which means decayed or hurt .  In Hindi, the word `Aahta`  ,  it became `Aahat` , which means any sound , whatever you can hear is an `Aahat`.  Now, the sounds that are there inside us, which we can't of course here. But we have these trillions of cells, there are  1000s of `Vrittis`  acting through different chakras. In fact, our blood gushing all over the body. That should be a sound of a highway. But we are not able to hear all these sounds, you are not able to focus or understand what our emotions are telling us. That is because in this survival oriented world, we are trained to focus only our senses. But at some point, when we feel we are satisfied from survival standpoint, when we know that we can live well, based on whatever accumulated wealth we have, or whatever internal wealth we have.

> Internal wealth is something that allows you not to accumulate external wealth. We'll come to this in a later discussion. 

At some point, we do need to listen to our emotions. Now the sounds that come from within us, are called `Anahta` , which basically means the pure sounds, unhurt sounds, undecayed sounds. Those are the sounds of your being. And we need to hear them, so that we are able to hear our own body experience. These sound are  controlled by heart chakra. And Heart Chakra is also called `Anahata`. The name itself of the chakra is `Anahta`. This chakra is the place to give you ability to talk to your emotions, to be able to hear your own sounds. 

Now in later years, Guru Nanak Dev made it `Shabda Kirtan` . And that's how we hear the `Gurbani`. So the point I'm making is the way `Nada yoga` works is we begin with focusing on the external sounds. Words meticulously crafted, what we call mantras, and the chanting of those mantras, but the mere recital and chanting is not sufficient. We listen to the words we deeply focus on sentence and how the mantra is chanted. But those are not mandatory things. The core of` Nada Yoga` is to hear the word, understand the context and try to feel our emotional response.  To start feeling what your emotions are telling you,  And gradually as we start understanding ourselves. We can slowly move away from the external sounds and then entirely focus on our internal sound. Our internal sound itself is called `Anahat  Nada` . `Anahat Nada ` is the one that you want to here as an outcome of `Nada Yoga `and the idea of heart chakra in hath yoga is that using some of the `Mudras` or some of the `Asanas` and utilising other tools, we can stabilise the heart  chakra, Heart Chakra stabilises when we are able to hear our emotions and really understand, what we stand for, once we understand what we stand for, then is the next question is "how to speak it", which is controlled by throat chakra, the spoken word, we will talk about that in in next episode. But the idea of this, these speak sessions or these podcasts is to use `Nada Yoga` to intensely focus on `Karma Yoga` as told by Krishna to Arjuna in Bhagavad Gita, this is Karma Yoga expressed by Krishna and understood and appreciated by Arjuna  and is presented as as an exercise of `Naad Yoga`. 

Transcribed by https://otter.ai
