<center><h1>Karma- Actions</h1></center>
<center>
<figure>
    <audio
       controls
       src="./c3e3.mp3">
          Your browser does not support the
          <code>audio</code> element.
    </audio>
</figure>
</center>

## Episode 3
> As we know, we are trained in this survival oriented world - which is not a bad thing. But that means we are continuously focused on our senses. Ears included. And senses only consume. There is only one way to communicate our external and internal experience. That is through speech. Our eyes and our facial expressions do help but speech is the primary way to communicate. We can of course write these days but we write what we want to speak. In other words writing is a way to store the speech data. So we have five senses consuming all sorts of information and our body acting accordingly and there is one throat to say and explain our experience. 
### 3.7

Yah [one who] Tu [but] Indriyani [the senses] Mansa [ by the mind] Niyamya [as a routine] Arabhte [ndulge in] Arjuna [arjuna];

Karm-Indriyaih [with the active work organs] Karm Yogam [ritual of action] Asaktah [without attachment] Sah [s/he] Vishishyate [excels]

{on the other hand, if one engages in `Karm Yoga` with mind and active work organs, she is special and she excels}

### 3.8

Niytam [prescribed or predecided] Kuru [do] Karma [actions in performance of duties] Tvam [you] Karma [actions] jyayah [better] hi [certainly] Akarmanah [inaction];

Sharira [body] Yatra [journey] Api [even] Cha [also] Te [your] Na [never] Prasiddhyet [something acceptatble because it is popularly agreed upon by all] Akarmanah [inaction].


{ Perfom your prescribed or predecidede duties for such actions are certainly better than inaction. Even for maintenance of physical body, "inaction" is not a popular choice} 

### 3.9

Yajna-arthaat [Done for the sake of Yajna] Karmanah [actions] Anyatra [otherwise] Lokah [world] Ayam [this] Karm-Bandhnah [bondage by work];

Tat [For it] Artham [for the sake] Kaunteya [O son of Kunti] Mukt-sangh [liberated from the curse of association] Samachar [do dexterously and balanced].

{ O Arjuna - Do actions, dexterously and in balanced manned liberated from the curse of association, because all other actions are for bondage to this world}


