Something in me struck like a thunderbolt. I had never heard a sound of fire, much less those of an automated Kalashnikov, but I was sure. The firing went on for an eternity in our makeshift sleeping hall. It was the Table Tennis room of the boys hostel, tonight sleeping eighteen of us, of Regional Engineering College Kurukshetra (commonly called RECK). Two girls of our twenty strong contingent were probably sound asleep in the girls hostel, somewhere near. We were there to participate in "Satanalia" - the annual cultural competition of Thapar Institute of Technology Patiala (commonly called Thapar) — an engineering degree college of equal repute as RECK. It must be fear, that instead of getting up to check, I simply curled up in my stuffed blanket `Rajai`, and turned left. Just like the time, I froze into a dead heap, my arms around my knees and hands covering my bent in head. The upper thigh was the most exposed for someone standing in the middle of almost thirty feet long room. That is exactly where first bullet stuck me. It felt as it my entire body jumped half a feet further by the impact and I thought my leg must have sprung open many more. The bullet entered the bottom of my thigh and came out of the other side but no cry came out of me. I was later told that I was lucky for the bullet shaved past my femur and since no bone was broken I probably didn't feel the most acute pain. And whatever I felt , vanished instantly for my leg got numb. Not only was my bone spared, the bullet didn't puncture my main vessel either. Which explained I didn't die of bleeding or went into a coma. What I lost was pure muscle of my right thigh. All of it was gone. I was probably the easiest target and I just got one bullet out of ~ three hundred rounds counted later (by police).


