Lets us say we live in a wholistic universe. For example, a wholistic universe is where we know how to multiply  but we don't know how to divide . A wholistic world is not unreal. For example if we start with a universe of unknown random prime numbers -  any combinations of primes may choose to multiply themselves,  but the product can't factor itself - simply because the factors (contributing primes) are unknown and mathematically it is quite difficult to factor products of large primes. For example using MPQS method a 75 digit number would take 100 hours for a fast computer to factorize. In essence a wholistic world is something where once multiplied, the product loses information of the prime constructors (it's factors). The product is just another unique number and it is visible to us and to all the unknown prime numbers (product being in scope for the variable that represents a unknown prime)

If you are one of the primes in this world, how would you find what is your value? The answer is not very hard.

- Choose any other prime number. Assume this number is your mirror image &self.  Multiply self and &self and note the product.
- Iterate with all the primes in the population. 
- Find the lowest number of all the products.
- If there exists a "unity" in this universe then &unity (as &self) multiplied to self would be the lowest number. For example we normally consider number 1 as unity. 1 multiplied with any number is the number itself.But unity need not be number 1. It is simply the &self real number that gives the lowest value. Every prime number in the population may find a different unity that brings it to the lowest value. Lets say unity in our population of random primes is 2. If so then every member of our random population would think they are twice their size and likewise for the larger primes as "unity". Unity is simply the smallest prime in random generation and it is factored into every other member as a unit of measure.

Think of `Vishnu` as the code that is generating the random numbers. `Bramh` as the visible products. And `Siva` as the above algorithm to find who you are. 

Every visible number in `Bramh` is a product of two primes - self and assumed &self.  `Siva` accepts only the lowest products and all other values are decayed. In essence, when the program finishes, all the random unknown primes are visible in the products. The universe of unknown primes is reflected in products of primes with unity. This is manifestation. Every visible node in `Bramh` has a complete copy of `Unity` built into it. We call it `Atma`. In essence a complete copy of knowledge is now got carried forward to every member of the population.

Now think this as a dynamic never ending system. `Vishnu` is continuously producing the primes. New nodes are getting added to `Bramh` and `Siva` is continuously reveling the real values of primes. All those whose lowest values are found need to iterate once again whenever a new prime is thrown in the mix by Vishnu to check if the value of "unity" further reduced or not. In essence, system is trying to find out the lowest value of unity. Mathematically speaking unity is tending towards 1. Spiritually speaking we are trying to find the knowledge that is part of every revelation. We are doing so by raising the spread of Vishnu, Bramh and Siva - Rise of consciousness.

Why our world is wholistic? Why we can't do factors ? Because we don't know the shape of "unity". In mathematics we are able to factor (even though it may be 100 hours for a large prime) because we assume unity is 1. And we assume 1 is part of every prime number - a prime is that is divisible by itself or number 1. We never ask what is 1? or why every prime is divisible by 1. What we assume in mathematics is actually the real question.

If you were the prime number, you will know who you are as soon as you find the unity of the specific generation - the one that is common to all. Finding "who am I" is thus the most fundamental quest.

The next question is why should you find yourself ? The answer is simple - since every other prime has multiplied with you in order to find who they are, if you know who you are , then you know all the participants. This the beauty of `Bramh` - in the hidden generations of primes we know nothing. In the conscious rendering of `Bramh` , everyone knows what everything is. Thus `Bramh` is the value chain driven by consensus. Those who find who they are, are the blocks of this value chain.

Another key thing to note here is, in every universe (generation of random primes), there does exist a product of unity.&unity. This product is simply the unity because unity multiplied with unity is unity. This existence is the value token that may be used to measure everything else. The arithmetic of addition and subtraction starts from here. Thus this unit become the token for value exchange. 

The whole purpose of this hidden rendering of `Vishnu` (and conscious discretion of `Siva` to regulate `Bramh`)is to establish the value of `Unity`. In `Vaidik` science, for simplicity sake, unity is considered `Vishu` and individual values of primes are considered `Siva`. Thus `Vishnu` is `Atma` - the knowledge of consensus held with in ; and `Siva` is `swaroop` - who am I. 

Since all the generations with in `Vishnu` are random - the protocol of `Vishnu` is, by definition, permission less and censor resistant - No participant knows who they are and what every other node is - kinda like a sha256 of a prime number. Imagine a big resort where only singles are allowed - no one knows anyone else except for a name tag given by resort. People are allowed to explore and form friendships here - when they form a relationship of some sort, they may publish to the entire world what they stand for - what is their collective vibe based on mutual consensus. Just as the product that show up in `Bramh` is such that factor members are invisible. The rendering of `Siva` however is all aware. Every established node in `Bramh` knows exactly what the other node is. The role of `Siva` is to sustain only those products in `Bramh` that accomplish rational consensus because they have found themselves based in rational consensus. But consensus can be forced in `Bramh`. Such system where consensus is leader (or democracy driven), must arrange for their own survival and  sooner or later - such system must decay just they way they had grown up. Only those systems that implement `Vishnu's` protocol - permission less and censor resistant nature - they define their own value exchange protocol and may lead to higher levels of consciousness. One must note, no worldly system is as efficient as `Vishnu` in terms of implementation of said protocols - not even bitcoin. They are all on a spectrum. Systems with more resilient implementation last longer.

Since Unity always exist- no matter what it's value - one or one trillion, the unity in itself is immutable. There is always a unit even in a random generation. It exists but despite infinite renderings, no participant can ever know unity with absolute certainty -> unity is unknowable -> `Avykta`. In essence immutable unity acts through it three potencies - `Vishnu`, `Bramh` and `Siva`.

You can be sure that unity exists but you can't know it ever. The next best thing thus is to know who you are and what everything else is in this network `Bramh`. The way to know yourself is give up all the desires and indulge in `Karma` to establish who you are. Only `Yazna` can lead to `swaroopa`. It is akin to manifestation of self.

---

The tendency to cultivate forced consensus is decay in the communication protocol. The vocal communication layer decayed during times of `Parasara`. Thus a new communication mode was necessary. The obvious reason was the kings and reciters tried to regulate the society through a forced consensus. The key message was the king is representative of God. The intent was not bad - kings did love their people and tried hard to make their lives better but not all the kings could be Rama - an ideal ruler. Not only the respect, kings also wanted a piece of the produce - agriculture and metallurgy - to maintain an army. The objective of the army was obviously to protect the lands and people but existence of army is an invitation to the war. 


The ways of `Vishnu` and `Siva` are incomprehensible. A noble purpose - to protect their own people - had unintended consequences. Every king wanted a bigger and more capable army. Which meant more tax on the populations and frequent wars. The effect was exactly opposite of the intent. But effects of every regulation are not so black and white.

At the beginning of 20th century, for every 1000 human births, 100 infants died before they celebrated their first birthday. Among many independent efforts to save the newborns such as vaccines and sanitation, the key was 1906 landmark legislation known as "Pure food and Drugs act". To implement this noble legislation "Food and Drugs Administration" was created around 1930s. One can applaud FDA and other regulatory agencies around the world for better health outcomes across the globe. More specifically in case of infant mortality. Infant mortality reduced by 97% by the start of 21st century - only 7 infants died for 1000 human births. But the strange thing is, despite better regulated medicine, sanitation, eduction - all of which was heavily regulated to extend longevity, 20th century saw the biggest increase in disease. Specifically in children, type 1 diabetes and autism have become common place. There is no such increase in case of animals who continued to follow the rules of `Vishnu` to extend themselves into `Bramh`. Medicine , Food, education and sanitation - as systems - were not permission less or censor resistant - they were heavily regulated. By the time we reached fifth mutation of humans saved through regulated systems - a strange trend appeared - particularly in affluent nations and richer classes of society -  Pain medications became addiction. As if the life was a pain. Living needed rampant use of alcohol. Milk was replaced by beer in refrigerators. It is hard to imagine that physical world became a prison and the suicide rate climbed to highest - as if all those who were so painstakingly brought into the world , declared the place was not worth living. Particularly in the richer and affluent sections of humanity - be it richer nations or wealthy sections of society that had best access to regulated medicine , eduction, security, sanitation. Why ?

It is almost impossible to speculate the reason of such a change - as many narratives as many mouths but no one could deny the fact that population quickly and voluntarily signed up for a new unregulated technology. A new communication technology that allowed them to live virtual lives away from the physical - internet. It was quite clear that humans wanted to embrace an unregulated , permission less and uncensored medium to communicate. A particular mutant of humans opted to live totally in the virtual world. For them physical world was only a means to plug into virtual reality.

----

Computers disrupted every industry that humans had developed over five thousand years but two disciplines were rather muted in early part of the history - cryptography and artificial intelligence. They became visible by 2020. Cryptography founded an open value exchange protocol "bitcoin" while artificial intelligence replaced the written word - a highly regulated industry of very large language models.  

The biggest impact of artificial intelligence was on the computers themselves. The general purpose computers growth stalled in early thirties - that included laptops, desktops and even smartphones. Instead the world was inundated with small robots that assisted in every walk of life. They did all the mundane things that humans would rather not do because they wanted to be always in their virtual worlds. Robots incarnated from lawn mowers to dog walkers; from food makers to farm workers. Humans had no cost advantage in physical world but they did have one in the virtual - their brains - which were as big biological neural network as any standard large language model of that time that ran on the silicon based system. The key advantage however was energy consumption - they could run their brains at the cost of a 100 watt light bulb.

As the demand for AI robots went through the roof, funny money found it's way to engineering. The question was how to deploy AIs in cost effective ways. Smaller models running on home servers to control all the robots in the house but they lost to very large language models running in the cloud. People understood artificial general intelligence was impossible. AGI needs to be even bigger computing capability because it runs millions of skills for one owner whereas the cloud based AI LLMs could serve millions of customer on one specific skill - and more importantly they were all regulated. Working with regulators they made sure smaller players were blocked but the problem of energy consumption was real even for them.

It's not energy was not abundant. It was but it was never infinite. It had a cost. And also a competing way to deploy energy in - bitcoin. The value exchange protocol is by definition work for work. Means humanity burnt as much energy in storing value as it did on generating value. One must spend as much energy on a gram of Gold as on 100 kilos of copper to make them equal in value. Bitcoin was digital Gold. The question for energy creators was always to find better returns. The binary choice was to deploy energy in value mining (bitcoin) or value generation (AI). 

Bitcoin was always a better and stable investment not only because of less volatility but also because it was predictable. The bitcoin ran on human written code that was reviewed and maintained by humans - albeit lots of help from LLMs to write the code but it was written in computer programming languages such as C or Rust. The cheap AI based services (lawn mowers for example) were never mission critical. No one was losing their breath because a robot spilled the coffee because other would mop it off even without having to instruct. This LLMs created code was never read by humans much less maintained. Why would you spend time in reviewing the code for 99 % physical world services which were like commodities. Only few cloud based LLM services were mandated to be maintained by humans - for example health care because human bodies must be kept alive and happy for them to work in virtual worlds.

The notion of work is important to understand here. Since education was regulated, humans became addicted to work. The unintended consequence was least understood even till 22nd century. No one asked the question as to why humans want to be more productive. The idea is most counter-intuitive. The point is - if you have an army of educated people in a regulated system , they want to use their tools of education. A chemist wants to create more chemistry. A lawyer wants more law suits. If you mass educated people instead of an open model the outcomes can't be predicted. Again it is a speculation but the reason that humans want to be more productive is because they are educated. We can tell this with confidence because no other species created productivity tools. Besides the point , AI found a lot of use in such services. These services were essentially experiences - schools , hospitals, courts - were created as virtual environments where humans worked as live agents. To pay for the bills in physical world. Most of entertainment and connection  was of-course virtual from much earlier times. You are probably reading this text as your entertainment quota of the day ! Aren't you ?

---

One of the reason humans moved to virtual environments was simply cheaper real estate in virtual worlds. And second biggest advantage was to save commute time. The pandemic ion 2020 really triggered this shift. No one cared if the people were really happy though most of the official surveys show humans wanted to work from home.

