# Upashama

Krishna Dvaipayana was brought to life for a purpose. He was destined to compile thousands of sacred insights — new and old — from ancient cave dwellers to super saints (`Maharishis`); and rearrange the text into four foundational volumes — `Vedas` — four books of most ancient wisdom known. This, in itself, was virtuous enough to dedicate a life-time, but his real goal was lot bigger. Immensity of his purpose, rightly made him one of the 'immortal eights' in Hindu tradition.

We need to uncover a bit of ancient history, to appreciate the task at his hand. No one knows the exact timeline but there is no doubt that it did happen. The proof is in existence of the texts he wrote, which not only includes four `Vedas`, it also does eighteen `Puranas` and the mega epic of `Mahabharata` — his own story and the longest written narrative in a poetical format ever, in any language, old or new.

Before his time, scriptures were passed on as `Shruti` — the spoken word. A choir of reciters and composers (`Vyasas`) chanted the `mantras` whole day — from the early morning to the late evening. Certain `mantras` must be recited at a specific time of the day and at a specific place. Some of them must be performed in front of holy fire — rites. 

Rites were primarily conducted to invoke natural powers of the elements — a ritual known as `Dravya Yazna`. `Drvya` in Sanskrit means material. Thus, `Drvya Yazna` literally means the rites performed for certain material gains. For example a rite performed for more rain is a type of `Drvya Yazna`. So is a rite performed to seal a wedlock. The formalization of rituals — intonations and pronunciation in carefully perfected ensemble, the time and the place, and the specific order of homage to various deities; served two purposes. First it became a formal auspicious way to celebrate certain life events — such as child birth, marriage, retirement and even death. Second, it created an interaction platform between the ones who were seeking a higher purpose and the ones who hosted the ritual for material gains. The host got the satisfaction of pleasing the deities through a qualified priest while the priests got a lively hood through alums. The homage would also go to the priest or other knowledge workers `Pandits`. It was a carefully thought out intervention to keep the society in certain checks and balances and to incentivize the ones who were dedicating their lives to carrying forward the research. The craft of reciting `mantras` with an ascetic lifestyle purposed for a singular focus on diction, was called `Naad Yoga`. This `yoga`, like many others, must be practiced with a strict daily routine (`Bramhacharya`). The idea was to tune human body into the skill of understanding, memorizing and chanting by removing all the external material distractions even though the rite itself might be seeking material gain for the host.

This formalization of rituals ensured the knowledge was passed on from one generation to the next. Imagine a world without written word — no books, no libraries and of course no internet. In that world, `Naad Yogies` were the vessels of knowledge. The literal meaning of word `Naad` is a dense voluminous sound produced from the bottom of lungs that proves something — something akin to a lion's roar in a vast silent jungle. It proves the lien of the lion on his territory. `Vyasas` were essentially `Naad Yogies`. They were trained to hold life energy in heart and throat `Chakras` — a typical tradition of `Naad Yoga` and a proof of being distinct among rest of the species because other species held the life energies in lower two `Chakras` namely — `Swadhishthana` — the `Chakra` of sexuality and `Manipuraka` — the `Chakra` of consumption.  By moving the energy upwards, sometimes also referred to as raising `Kundalini`, `Naad Yogies` separated humanity from animal kingdom, while still being a seeker of peace (and prosperity) for all the species. If your interest is peaked in what kind of renditions were these, I recommend listening to this one-minute clip of `Shanti Mantra` from `Brahmin` priest Santosh Mudgal [here](https://www.siddhayoga.org/shanti-mantras/om-dyauh-shanti). Notice the stresses on the syllables and over all elocution. `Vaidik` elocution is a complete genre of rendition just like the gospel music in the west. 

**There was no “generally” cherished art of 'writing'.**

Some practitioners of this divine craft — `Naad Yoga`, did consider the idea of converting the `Mantras` into text format, for obvious advantages of durability and portability.  What if all the `Vyasas` died? What if human race met its demise though epidemic, war or other extinction level events. The ancient wisdom must be preserved beyond human shelf life. Those questions existed, but without the comfort of a Mac, “writing” was a herculean task! There were some bold attempts. Some early adopters wrote down, on dried (and smoke treated) palm leaves, but that was mostly experimental work — half-baked, grammatically obsolete and contextually incoherent. The focus was not on the content. It was on the 'writing apparatus' and to test the claims of “writing” aficionados. The advocacy on the pro-text side was the obvious notion of freedom. And the promise that the divine information could be made accessible to all. Something like the original promise of the internet — free access to information.

Majority of the `Vyasas and Naad Yogies` didn't believe written word could ever replace the rigor and authenticity of chanting. Some beneficiaries of spoken layer, even announced that efforts to jail the wisdom into written symbols was downright demonic. Somewhat like central banks' nervousness towards crypto protocols these days! Though writing meant lot more content could be scribed, and passed on to far-flung places; but the act of writing (and reading) wouldn't invoke elemental powers — they thought! How would you send the homage — the ghee, fruits and milk to the deities without proper ritual? — they asked ! Somehow, the ritual had gotten more important than the content. On top, writing had no payback whereas chanting meant they could perform the rites for the kings and the rich, in lieu of necessities and niceties. Rich were mandated to perform rites at least sixteen times through their life span — birth, marriage and death being the major milestone rituals. In addition, every year, they must perform a rite for the peace of their dead — `Shradha`. Kings had even more rituals at their hands. In all it was a flourishing economy of rituals and ritual makers.  Priests were more important than a family physician !

Writing, on the other hand, had no such incentive. There was no kindle book store, no way to barter the text. It did have a promise to democratize the information and that did appeal to some, but such people were few and far. Most felt a commoner had no reason to access the `Vaidik` knowledge without a qualified gate keeper. And most thought the job of a `Vyasa` was eternal — fully protected till the end of humanity. Those who didn't believe in rituals and thus by extension defied the `Vaidik` wisdom were named `Asuras` — a class of outspoken people just short of being a monster (`Rakshsa`)

New rituals were being added left right and center. A new ritual if you want to enter a new home. Another if you bought a horse and a cart. Yet another to start the harvest. While the chanters were busy expanding their market and often times performing phony tricks to attract wealthy clients, the writers' camp was innovating at rapid pace. A new grammar for `Sanskrit` — the ancient language for `Vaidik` communication, was recently developed. `Panini` — a grammarian par excellence, wrote the new rules in his block buster book `Ashtadhyayi — eight chapters`. `Panini's Sanskrit` was to the ritualistic spoken words what `C lang` was to silos of computing before Unix arrived at the scene.  There was a sudden rush for writers. All the super sages wanted to use `Panini's` techniques to document their knowledge. Availability of text soon became the prerequisite for sustaining ever larger number of students — to enable (and certify) them for rendering rites on behalf of (rich) clients. `Ashrams` — the saintly abodes, soon got turned into `Gurukuls` — the boarding schools where students stayed with the teachers to learn the appropriate deliverance of rites — a first step on the difficult career path — the coveted title of `Vyasa`. The first course, of course, was `Panini's Sanskrit`. It was like html for the aspiring web designers. Centuries later, Paul Kiparsky wrote about `Ashtadhyayi` ...

> Modern linguistics acknowledges it as the most complete generative grammar of any language yet written, and continues to adopt technical ideas from it — 1994.

Back to our story — this was the first time someone was serious about organizing the world's knowledge — long before the founders of Google had the same idea :-). `Maharishi Parashra` — the future father of `Krishna`, wanted to capture the “true” knowledge into text format and make it available to everyone. 'Organize' didn't mean dumping massive data loads into one big Hadoop cluster. They obviously didn't have GPT3! Instead, they figured out many organic faculties of knowledge — well-being and longevity (`Aayurveda`); economics (`Arth Shastra`); linguistics (`Vyakarna`); arithmetic (`Ganit`); to name a few. Organic, because these sciences were built on and were closely linked to music, literature and expressive art forms (`Sangeet, Sahitya and Kala`). There was no distinct separation between sciences and the arts. Instead of crunching bits and bytes, they first invested in the pursuit of consciousness, and deep appreciation of the physical reality. 

Sages developing these distinct artifacts of knowledge were called `Rishi`, somewhat like a PhD of our times. People who had attained demonstrable mastery in a specific field or indigenously developed a new area of research were called `Maharishi`. In a way, `Vyasa` was a person who would carry forward, and sometimes assimilate, or even improve the messages of `Maharishies`. For example the seventh book of `Rik Veda` was first spoken by `Maharishi Vasishtha`. It is the most cited part of `Rik Veda` that includes the reverent `Gaytri Mantra`. These hymns were passed on verbally to his son `Shakti Muni` — father of `Maharishi Parashra`. Keeping the tradition intact, `Maharishi Parashra`, memorized the hymns right from early childhood. Some stories say he learnt these verses in his mother's womb. But `Parashara` went a step further, he also “texted” most of his own work e.g. — `Krishi Parashra` the book of agriculture — the first of its kind on that topic, though his primary interest was `Astrology` — the ultimate application of `Vaidik` knowledge.

Astrology (`Jyotish`) was the old long ancestor of modern day cosmology. An astrologer could sure foretell the future, but astrology was inherently a deep understanding of space and time. Effect of motion of massive celestial bodies in space-time, on our physical reality — our tiny box. Armed with this ultimate spiritual science, instead of crisper-ing the genes, they figured how to predict the celestial conditions that might blossom the expression of a specific gene pool — with high degree of accuracy. Even today, in India, a priest (`Pandit`) would normally draw the state of heavenly bodies at the time of child birth, called `Janmpatri` — a cosmic birth chart. This document, normally kept as a scroll, not only details the exact position of nine main `Nakshtra` (the sun, moon and seven other planets), it also details the effect of the motion of this system on the subject child. Even today, it is an important consideration (in many Hindu families) say to determine the suitable marital match. A modern name for such a skill might be 'Organic Bio Intelligence harvesting'! That is quite mouthful :-)

An accurate rendition of this skill, by someone who knew the underlying science of Astrology well, was like controlling the “chromosomal dice”. If someone could predict child's future owing to the effect of cosmic alignment at the time of birth — `Janmpatri`; then s/he could reverse engineer the logic to ascertain the best time to conceive a child for a specific target future. But it also meant long wait for the appropriate planetary alignment — sometimes, many generations in the future. `Krishna Dvaipayana` was one such awaited child. His birth was planned and predicated by `Maharishi Parashara` — an astrologer extraordinaire with proven `Yogic capabilities` — abilities to interact (bend) the elements. 

`Maharishi Parashara` was excited at the prospect of organizing the entire wisdom and he thought written text was the only way to pull off such a miraculous thing. He however had no illusions, he knew scribing the knowledge, might take more than a lifetime — that too if one was sure there exists one righteous path for all humans. If he was able to ascertain such a path, he must pass on his learning to his son. If his son, building on what he already knew, could further refine and test the truth, then that truth must be embedded into every conscious unit. It was an ambitious and tall order but that would be a worthy heir for his life work. He believed almighty God blessed him the skill of astrology to ensure he found a such an heir. 

The all important question — “if (or not), there exists one unique righteous path ?”, was a matter of regular discussion that ran deep in the family. `Maharishi Vashishtha` his grand father, opined that there were many right paths for humans to realize their potential. He felt a farmer was as important as a priest and so was a cobbler. As a pragmatist, `Vashishtha` wished peace to every one no matter what path they chose. However, his son `Shakti Muni` argued that even if there were many legit paths, one person, must stick to one path for if someone kept changing his course based on changing situations, how s/he is any different from animals? And how would he accomplished excellence? 

`Shakti Muni` literally practiced what he preached and ended up giving his life for the sake of his beliefs. The story goes around that one morning he was walking with his followers to river `Yamuna` — for the holy bath before the day breaks in — a daily routine he had cultivated in his group. That ominous morning, a king happened to be returning from `Yamuna` with his queen and chosen body guards — drunk and sleep deprived. Apparently they had spent the night on the banks of `Yamuna` hunting the animals, and roasting them alive to eat with old wines. The shrieks of scared animals were audible in the silent night to `Shakti Muni` though his abode was quite a distance. In the morning he also got the news that king's men had taken women from the nearby village (with force) and kept them awake whole night — doing whatever they felt right to please themselves and the king. In the morning rush hour, `Shakti Muni` expected king to clear the way for scripture mandated right of path to a sage and demanded a sage to never give up his path. On the other side, the king, oblivious to `Shakti Muni's` metaphorical extension of the ideology, expected a clear path for himself and particularly his new beautiful queen. He had expected the sage would shower blessings for their new wedding. In fact, he had hoped that `Shakti Muni` would show up at his picnic place last night to welcome him on this side of the `Yamuna`. Anyways, the simple discussion turned into an altercation and out of anger, `Shakti Muni` cursed the king and his troupe to immediately turn into monsters — figuratively — for the monstrosity they spread throughout the night on this peaceful range. That did happen but the king, having turned into a monster, killed `Shakti Muni` and his team. That is what monsters do !. Story besides, `Shakti Muni` must have questioned the king for his abhorrent behavior (for that is the righteous path of a `Karm Yogi Rishi`) and the king was anyways a monster!

This incident had a deep effect on young `Parashara`. For one, he developed a deep hatred for the monsters but more importantly he thought if (or not) one must stick to one's path? Or is there a subset of values that must be followed by every seeker no matter what path they are on. That is what he thought was the ultimate wisdom. The question that laid heavy on his mind and kinda morphed into a life long quest, was to find those values and scribe them.

After years of careful study of motion of heavenly bodies and their co-relation with birth of human intelligence, stars were finally aligned. `Maharishi Parashara` was ready to take a child as his born son. And he named him long before the physical birth — `Krishna Dvaipayana` — Someone who could go beyond duality just like an island between two ˝never-meeting˝ banks of a river. Someone who could establish a middle spot amongst two never concurring ideologies — for the truth lies somewhere near the center. The literal meaning of `Dvaipayana` is born on an island.

And he had his eyes set on `Matsyagandha` as prospective surrogate mother for this child.

----

`Matsyagandha` was daughter of a poor fisherman who passed away when she turned eleven, not that anyone was counting. Her mother had died in labor of her birth. No one wanted to be with her for she was labeled bad omen. Poor girl knew only one way to live in this world — ferry people across `Yamuna` — the mighty river, by the abode (`Ashrama`) of `Maharishi Parashara`. Her only possession was her father's dilapidated boat. The cruelty of her fate — no one wanted to ride with her. Not only the boat was in bad shape, she herself had a pungent smell; thus the name `Matsyagandha` that literally meant one who smelled like fish (`Matsya` in Sanskrit, means fish and `Gandha` means fragrance). 

No one had ever trained the poor girl how to ˝make-up˝ or present herself. Absolutely no training in hospitality. She used to get 'stuck and stranded' commuters when no other boat was around, normally early mornings or late evenings. And she hated it for she was scared of `Yamuna` in windy mornings as much as in the invisible dark nights. Many times she thought of leaving her boat to the deep waters of the treacherous river but even death wouldn't come easy to her. No one in the village talked to her. She had no friends. No one would care to notice if she was lost from the face of Earth. The solitude of lone purposeless life made `Matsyagandha` spend most her time with herself, and her imagination. Back at her broken hut, she used to gaze the stars through the holes in her thatched roof. She had no formal education, yet, she honed curiosity of a writer and creativity of a poet, just by talking to herself — and the stars. And she didn't even know it. Her world had no bridge to the scriptures and none at all to the ongoing tussle between spoken word and the written text.

`Maharishi Parashara` had taken her boat once, when he wanted to spend a dark night on the island middle of the mile wide `Yamuna`. A cursed jungle where no man wanted to go. Fishermen wanted their boats at least half a mile from the haunted space. Only `Matsyagandha` would take `Maharishi` to the island for she had no passenger in days. `Maharishi` was impressed with her courage though he didn't quite get the reason — she was short on basic supplies such as rice and milk. For many days, she was living on raw uncooked fish that made her smell even worse. And she herself was curious of the island. Many times she had thought of checking the place out, to see the demons. What worse could they be then her own fate?

As `Maharishi's` alighted the boat, `Matsya` felt his magical presence. She felt safe. And free, at the same time, as if no one was watching her. Neither pity nor lust. No one bothered by the state of her boat and even less of the stink she was oozing. As if he was totally disconnected from the ruck of her world, yet so profoundly present. `Maharishi` was lost in his thoughts, his eyes gazing the setting sun and then the tall ghostly trees of the island. She wondered what he was thinking — her world and his, so close yet so different. 

The ride to the island was slightly downstream and the wind was favoring the back. `Maharishi` sat on the rear end of the boat. `Matsya` stood in the middle with nothing much to do except adjust the aging sails. In between she kept an eye on the passengers though today there was only one. He too, totally lost in himself. Random thoughts shifting from history to the current state of affairs, and circling back. He recalled his grand father `Maharishi Vashistha` and that how uncomplicated the life was, back then... 

In those days, there was only one definition of truth, and rest everything was false. As the boat took to the waters, his thoughts interlocked the waves — the rhythmic motion of the boat. Life has gotten so complex these days — he thought. Back then, if there was a conflict, scriptures were deemed as the final arbitrator. With the improvement in spoken layer — ability to better articulate complex ideas verbally — the first major innovation humans did to themselves — they learnt to put forth “wrong verses right” from their point of view. This was a big leap forward. In essence, definition of wrong verse right became personal instead of being universal. This personalization had many pros, but a big basic problem ...

How to ascertain whose vantage was the correct representation of truth? For example, a blacksmith deemed fire as the true God for fire could melt the metals. On the other side, a farmer thought water was the true God for water was the source of food. Blacksmith argued how would a farmer cultivate without the tools (of agriculture) that were cast in Fire. Even the king needed swords to protect the state — all made available by the Gods of Fire. Farmer had a better argument! Without water there is no food — as a hungry man — how many days would a blacksmith even light up the fire? Without water, fire was a demon for it could burn the dry forests. And most importantly, water had the power to put the fire off. Only rain could save the holy Banyan trees. Blacksmith rebutted — Fire can evaporate water ... And so on ... No one ready to downplay their Gods, or even trivial ideas.

Even the scriptures could be seen differently from different vantage points. This meant humans must debate to prove their point. It was as if humanity had entered into a real life “twitter-verse”, except that there could be dire consequences. Losing the scuffles was degrading. People could be barred from the community or forced to leave a village depending on what belief they publicly upheld. Sometimes they would take on life threatening pledges — say sacrifice a limb to prove integrity of their ideas. Sometimes they could be burnt into the (holy) fire to check their purity. People were finding it exciting to organize and express a thought framework, but "freedom of speech" was still not a social contract. Yet there were many outspoken.

`Maharishi` attributed this verbosity to a vicious underlying cycle. He called it ˝curse of feedback˝ It became more and more important how others reacted to one's point of view — a natural incentive for those who could better express verbally. He attributed this curse to the rise of chanters and reciters. It was somewhat like blaming the social-influencers for the ill effects of Instagram, probably because there was no corporation to levy the blame for holding the mirror to raw human nature.

Official debates (`Shastratha`) were organized in kings' open courts on topics as varied as existence of singular God, or for example, to authorize state aggression to tax the neighboring states `Ashwamedha Yazna`? And even to jury the perceived acts as treason. Without a written down statute, the decision could be easily swayed in favour of the powerful. A situation could be justified through many conflicting explanations. “Plurality of views” was touted the primary differentiator from other species but we hadn't yet developed tools to manage “plurality”. Most animals had a “canned” behavior — a standard response to a specific situation — no conflicts — no debate. Humans could discuss the righteous action plan. The idea was once a path was agreed, everyone would stick to the plan. But reality was different. A defeat in arguments was as painful as a loss in a physical dual, and the consequences could be pretty harsh. `Maharishi` wondered if this cycle could ever be broken? Where would it end? — because in his mind, it was causing more harm than good! Human spirit was falling apart. At the same time, he didn't want humanity to return to the stone age to live like animals. How to determine the right path?

Even though humans got better at this multi-vantage world-view, they still struggled to determine the path that reached them to eternal peace. Every winner was always confronted with new situations that insinuated another round of debate. Every aspect of plurality was confusing and was adding more of it. The human psyche was aggravated with this endless inconclusive discussion on almost every topic conceivable. At the core of this confusion was the subtle change that happened. We were now more worried about the reaction of others. As we started spending more time in sharpening and better expressing our world view, we forgot what we ourselves wanted to do — our inner calling. We were losing our soul (`Atma`). Our focus shifted from actions that we did for our inner sake to the ones that were appreciated (or approved) by the community. We started living for the approval of the family, the race and the religion. And at most times, bringing these three core groups together was impossible. Family values conflicted with those of the race and race was at loggerheads with religion or vice versa. The definition of “righteous” became the approval of entire community and that narrowed the action field. You must not do anything that is not in line with family values, and race, and religion — in that order. The “self” was lost. Compliance became more important than the actions. How you were perceived by other verses what you actually wanted to do.

Those were the challenges for `Maharishi Parashara` and he wondered if one lifetime was enough to solve the puzzle and to accomplish a massive global change! Or he needed someone to carry on his journey to the finish line — may be a “think-alike” son who was also on the same discovery path. Who could find the true answer leveraging the work of his ancestors, and also manifest the change. What better can a 'man with a mission' ask? — a son who could take on the work he started.

`Yamuna` was unusually calm that night. `Maharishi's` train of thoughts was broken by `Matsyagandha`.  Almost thirty minutes into the ride, she finally mustered the courage to ask `Maharishi` something that was bothering her off late — the meaning of her curse! As she got the attention, she quickly sought the permission for a question. `Maharishi` gladly agreed to listen. It was a while he had spoken to a commoner. She shared her story, and went on and on. As if, it was in years she got someone to look at her tiny-box. She didn't even know that she knew the words that came off her mouth. Her perspective shaded in the pain of utter rejection was evocative. After a long circular narrative, she boiled down to contesting the existence of 'One God' for God can't be so merciless.

Her naive question rubbed `Maharishi` at number of painful memories. He recalled his time when he himself had lost the way. Growing up in his grand father's `Ashram` he was trained to regard deities as a representation of 'one truth'. He had immutable faith. But that was not the case for all. Many of his friends weren't as hung up on ideologies as he was. Many revolted against the idea of 'One' God. Many wanted to simply enjoy their lives with new-found foods and drinks and marry as many partners as they could. And many wanted to build their own world order — their own individual fork to the `Vaidik` 'way of life'. Such ideas were obviously unacceptable to the ritual makers. Thanks to the nexus of elite gate keepers with political agencies, such people were termed `Asuras`- non-believers who surrendered themselves unto evil desires. This particular trend turned into a kind of civil war, and young `Parashara` was caught right in middle. When his father (and many of his brothers) were killed by one such monster `Asura`, his world fell apart. He was split between darkness and light. 

`Maharishi` continued to drift into his past ... In the early days, he obviously had an innate hatred for the `Asuras` turned into monsters. So much so that he left the `Ashram` to wage a war in the name of ˝One God˝ to revenge his clan. He killed many and many he burnt alive. As he grew older, he realized the evil was not person specific. It was just a different vantage point. He was able to see both sides of the coin but could not tell if heads were right or the tails. And how to reconcile them. Both seemed right and wrong at the same time. The compelling argument on the side of `Asuras` was simple — they asked if ˝One God˝ was full of love, why is there death and misery in the world. God can't be merciless. Why doesn't God let everyone live like him — always healthy and beautiful. `Matsya's` naive question opened the old wound.

`Maharishi` thought what if the people he killed had gotten similar bad deal at the hands of fate. That couldn't be construed as their mistake for breeding similar contempt of God. If a common girl felt this way, why can't an educated `Asura`; but no one had ever put forth such unpretentious argument with a child like naivety. Her unintentional deduction forced the `Yogi` to engage in a conversation — an anomaly because `Maharishi Parashara` rarely spoke. Even the kings had to wait to hear his sermons. He rarely blessed anyone. He never performed rites for money or favors nor did he engage in religious debates. He was a silent seeker lost in himself.

Her innocent question and the pain in her eyes forced `Maharishi` to look at her, understand her life, and gaze into her future. Being a `Trikal Darshi` astrologer — someone who could see the past, present and future, he saw the purpose of her being. She was the one who could mother `Krishna`. Purified by the pain of her being, her intelligence was pious. `Maharishi` looked at the dark sky and saw a glitter in stars. He marveled at the scope of nature for having brought him in contact with `Matsya` He smiled and told her — Your life has a good reason. Gods have graced you with hardships to enable objectivity in you, for they want to have you serve as a host of something bigger. I shall come back to you for your help at appropriate time. Stay put...

`Matsyagandha` couldn't believe her ears! She forgot to notice that `Maharishi` didn't answer her question. Instead, he offered her hope. Maybe he was sharing the high tide of his own hope risen at this unscheduled rendezvous.

> If God is full of mercy, why is there misery in the world !

`Maharishi` believed the root cause of misery in (his) modern world was everyone held their point of view as "sacrosanct". People were not ready to look at the world from others' perspective. Being an astrologer, he had the ability to see the world from people's point of view.  If you couldn't see present of this world from someone's standpoint, what chance would you have to see their past or future. Astrology was essentially a science of jumping in someone's shoes and map the stars to their conditions.  After years of research, `Maharishi` concluded that there was only one way to enable people see beyond what they deemed righteous. Provide them with ˝knowledge˝ because he himself could gain this pragmatic vantage through rigor of the "knowledge". There however was a problem. Knowledge was locked under wraps in the rituals protected for a privileged class. Thus written text was the only way to open the flood gates of information to the masses. And that was the reason he was excited about the possibilities of new technology.

At the same time he was skeptical — what if the written texts fell into hands of `Asuras`? His mind wasn't yet ready to resolve the doubts. Internal churn was still on. For example, Astrology was a powerful tool. He wanted to make sure the access was only to the ones who deserved it. But who was there to decide? No wonder, `Naad Yogies` thought the act of writing was demonic. Once you wrote the words down, they became asynchronous. A book has its own journey. Ideas could reach the darker side.

Not only this, hard coding the knowledge into written text and making it available to everyone without the context and having them go through the rigor to bear the "knowledge", could be harmful to the seekers. And it could very well turn the balance of power - take the world into unchartered territories - he feared.

In a way, `Maharishi Parashara` was sold on the idea of `textification` of knowledge but he was held back by apparent pit falls. He was waiting for a sign. Something in the universe must lead him to the right path. Almighty must give him a clue for he was at stalemate with his own mind. And he saw that sign when he saw the future of `Matsyagandha`.

In that very moment, `Maharishi` realized he was on the right path for Gods had shown him a sign. Number of dormant ideas became fertile. In addition to being non-fungible and portable, text could stop people from changing their views on the fly. It would allow the debaters to reflect on their own thoughts before they blurt them out in the heat of a verbal dual. He weighed the risks of unwanted access but even written knowledge could be carefully guarded. He thought limiting the number of copies to keep a strong check on distribution. Distribution of written books must be controlled through a central organization. People must come to the place, submit the homage just like they would for the rituals and must read the text under supervision of a qualified ritual maker. He particularly liked the idea of offering homage for reading, because it also solved a another problem - the question of lively-hood of priests and the ritual makers. The homages thus collected will be distributed equally among all the priests of the `Ashram`.

The other concern was who would provide the context. How to make sure that the reader got the exact message. This was a harder problem to crack. What if the supervisor got lazy? Or the supervisor himself mutated the context. Why not build the entire context in the text itself. Why not present it in a format of real life events that everyone could understand. No wonder `Ramayana` was said in story format. A written story was the way forward. But how to make sure story didn't turn into a fantasy. That meant before a book was minted, the context must be tested in the physical reality. It must be lived through !

Sometimes, clarity comes in a jiffy. 

A new set of basic terms must be written down and embedded into every instance of conscious thinking, every social contract — be it an individual, a group or even a kingdom — every single format of human organization. Time was ripe for a new narrative but who would do that? How could someone understand all that is there to know, and then conceive the righteous path into written words. Maybe, it was a feat that be accomplished over many generations — like a relay race. Not only that, the path must be told as a compelling story that takes the collective consciousness onto a new charter. Stories, he thought, were the best way to circumvent a debate and provide true context. But the story must be tested in physical reality. Because truth is what actually happens in physical reality and only truth had the staying power! 

----

It was as if `Matsyagandha` found a reason to live. `Maharishi Parashara` got off the boat but he left a boatload of hope for `Matsya`. Every night she waited at the docks. She had gotten a new set of questions. What did `Maharishi` mean? Why would he even talk to someone like her. At times, she thought she was an insipid chatter for a `Yogi` — maybe he just wanted to let her feel good, other times she wanted to look beautiful — she must get herself ready for the bigger purpose — but she knew no ways. She wanted to smell good but she couldn't afford the Sandal wood — a wood used in making perfume paste. The hope and despair played the cycles of pains and joy. She was caught into duality of the prospects and unlike the waves in `Yamuna`, waves of duality were hard to conquer.

Exactly after a year, another dark night, and `Maharishi` returned to the wharf. `Matsyagandha` was there, for 'waiting' was her daily ritual. He asked her to ferry the boat to the island. She happily toed the boat into waters. Once the boat got stable, she looked at `Maharishi` in anticipation. She could feel her time had come. The moment she was preparing herself for a year was finally here. `Maharishi` read her thoughts. She was like an open book. Her big expressive eyes said what her lips would not. Without much ado, he asked her if she could give him a son. All he added that it was for a much larger cause, and that she would appreciate in due course. And of course, she may ask anything she wanted in return for the favor. It was blunt and abrupt, to put it mildly.

`Matsyagandha` was taken aback at the unexpected proposal. It was quite an anticlimax. She had no clue what to say and what to ask but she knew `Maharishi Parashara` was a `Yogi`. She knew he could bless her with whatever she wanted. She felt the aura of calm and the strength he exuded, that made her believe the stories of his wizardry, she had overheard commuters. Ever since their last meeting, she had wondered what she had in store. Her over sized imagination had led her to many scenarios but none of them was to bear his child. She knew that `Maharishi` would never take her as a wife for his life was dedicated to the celibate work of God, then why does he need a son?

She thought for a while — what would people say? Looking at `Yogi` she asked — how could I hide it from the village? Boat was leaving the banks of `Yamuna`- heading mid stream. The rise and fall of waters simulated in the rise and fall of her breath. She could hear herself breathing and it wasn't because she was rowing the boat alone. She could boat off this bank like a child could step into walk of her mother. The anxiety was from that no one had ever asked her a sexual favor and here she had a `Yogi` asking for a child! Does he like me or is he playing with me? Or is it something else? And the fear of unknown!

`Rishi Parashara` had a sigh of relief. First he didn't get a plain “no” or was asked to leave the boat — after all, his reputation was at stake. And second, he too wanted it a furtive union. Not only was he not ready for a wife, he knew `Matsyagandha` must go on, for she had a bigger role to play in her later life. 

And he had a plan — I know a nice cavern hidden in the island. We may stay there. I will be around you entire pregnancy and will have no dearth of food or shelter. After couple days, I will have a pigeon sent to the village head that you took on a journey downstream with me, as a sailor. And that we are gone to get lifesaving herbs from the East where `Yamuna` meets the most pious river `Ganga`. 

> Rivers `Ganga` and `Yamuna` run parallel through the Indus valley and the fertile plains of North. They formed the boundaries of the powerful kingdom established by King `Kuru`. He built a grand capital in `Hastinapur` — nowadays known as Delhi, the capital of India. `Hastinapur` was around two hundred miles upstream from the abode of `Maharishi`. `Kuru's` grandson King `Shantanu` currently ruled the place. `Maharishi` could have approached the king for help with herbs but they grew beyond his borders deep into kingdom of `Magadha` with capital in `Patliputra`. `Hastinapur` and `Patliputra` had ups and downs in the political relations. Thus, the trip had to be clandestine. Technically, `Maharishi` was not a native of `Kuru-land` because his `Ashram` was on the southern bank of `Yamuna` — a vast land infested with many `Asura` lords. After his early days of warring with `Asuras` in this area, `Maharishi Parashara` decided to stay back. For one, he had no fears of `Asuras` and second he didn't want anyone to feel he got scared and returned to the main land. The village where `Matsya` stayed, was run by an erstwhile `Asura` lord — `Dashraaj`. He was defeated by `Maharishi` but got his life back after he promised to live a conformal lifestyle. That he did, but inside he wanted to be important. His ambitions, still played young even though old age caught up on him. On the surface, he served the `Ashram` and stayed in close with the ideology of `Maharishi`.
>
> An advantage of staying off the main land was no local laws applied to the `Ashrama`. `Maharishi` was free to run his experiments and live the way he wanted. It also ensured only real seekers had the courage to reach him. Thus, less time spent on social and political disputation. And most probably, he had a fascination for the virgin island and the deep cave system that led to this cavern he was talking about. He believed that the path forward must emanate from the middle of two opposites and one need to dive deeper into the caves of soul to seek the ever illusive peace.

`Matsyagandha` thought for a while and finally nodded her consent. She was still not sure it was happening to her but the plan seemed workable. `Maharishi` looked at her and he figured she wanted something else. He stood up and asked — Do you want something else `Matsya`? — His voice full of gratitude.

What will happen to me after the child birth? I will need to feed the new born at least for a year!  But what after that? — asked `Matsyagandha`.

`Maharishi Parashara` thought for a while. He wanted to make sure he found the right words as much as he wanted to say the truth. He said — after two years, once child is ready to go with me, you may, if you wish to, return to the village.

`Matsya's` face turned hollow. Her words broken — this village hates me. The old women would find out in no time that I mothered a child out of a wedlock. They would despise me even more. 

As it is, `Matsya` was living a hell. This would only add more to the antipathy she already received. They would most likely name her a whore and burn alive as a culprit of prostitution — a recognized sin in `Kuru-land`. Stories of such incidents were common though no such incident had yet happened in her village. If they were kind, they would most likely hand her over to an `Asura` lords where she had be slaved for life and possibly gang raped daily.

No one would recognize you! — `Maharishi` said with conviction that was hard to ignore — I would bless you into the most beautiful woman ever lived. You will smell of Sandal all day and all night. People will call you `Yojangandha` for your fragrance shall surround a distance. (The literal meaning of `Yojan` being a mile and `Gandha` means fragrance.) Fares would line up to take your boat. And one among them might take you as a wife, having fallen madly in love with you. And thereafter, you would rule the world!

`Matsya` couldn't believe her ears. The prospect of smelling good and the idea that the village that hated her bowed to her beauty, set butterflies in her. She was not sure if it was the prospect of revenge or expectation of success, but the proposal now seemed like a true blessing. She folded both her hands and kneeled. And then she looked up straight into deep eyes of `Maharishi`. Her eyes said `Yes`. `Maharishi` met her gaze. He wanted to be sure — you need to say a 'Yes' `Matsya`. 

As he reconfirmed the acceptance, he touched the thumb of his right hand between her eyes and with left hand he pulled out his wand, lowered it into the waters of holy `Yamuna` and threw few droplets on her face. She felt her head spinning and she lost her consciousness. 

The place between the eyes, right above the nose is called `Ajna Chakra`. This is where a `Yogi Guru` may touch with his thumb to associate you with his "knowledge". Once the doorway is opened, there is no going back. You are now one with your `Guru`. In `Hindu` tradition, this is why a `tilak` is placed here, particularly if you participate in a ritual.

-----

She found herself in a bed made of flowers when she woke up. It was early morning. Light was slowly filling up the entrance of the cave. She quickly fixed her rags and hair, and stepped out of the cave and saw `Maharishi` sitting in a `Samadhi` (sitting upright in a trance). There was holy fire burning in front of the `Yogi`. The place smelled of Sandal wood. Later she realized this part of the island was full of Sandal trees. She sat there, grasping the serenity of the space, trying to make a sense of it all. The events of last night played in her mind. She tried hard to remember how she reached here but there was no recollection after she lost herself on the boat. Last thing she knew was a sprinkle of cold `Yamuna` water on her face.

While she was thinking of the night that she missed, a thick fog surrounded the cave. It was as if the smoke from the holy fire froze into a fog and made an invisible circle around. She felt comforted in the hidden state of everything around her. She also felt a strange feeling. As if, a life had taken place in her.

Am I pregnant? — She didn't intend to disturb the `Samadhi` but the words just came of her mouth. `Parashara` opened his eyes. He gazed at her with a welcome look — Yes — he said. Do you need anything? There is fresh milk and fruits, and he pointed to a grotto next to the entrance of the main cave. 

The main cave led to a cavern that had sweet `Yamuna` water flowing at the base. She also saw her boat moored there. Now she understood why `Maharishi` loved the island. It was a replica of heaven on earth. She also got an inkling that the place had been given a ghostly character to keep the tourists away. For the first time, she felt as if she was part of a bigger purpose. What exactly is going on? She wanted to know.  Things reveal as there time comes - She heard `Maharishi` at her back. She turned back to him. A smile on her face conveyed that she was happy and on board.

Next few months were magical for `Matsya`. She would wake up to the chants of Vedas and the smoke from holy fire surrounding the caves as a shield. She would go out with `Maharishi` to pick up fruits. There were goats to get milk. `Maharishi` showed her the skills to survive in jungle. After first full moon, `Maharishi` told her the time had come to start `Krishna's` education for the things he would learn in the comfort of motherly womb would last him a lifetime. `Maharishi` taught her `Sanskrit`. She quickly picked up the difficult language. `Maharishi` himself chanted all the `Mantras` to her. It became a daily ritual. It was probably a daily bath in `Yamuna`, Sandal wood lotion that `Maharishi` himself made for her or the vegan diet of only milk and fruits — Or the growth of internal knowledge that made her beautiful. But she assumed it were the blessings of `Maharishi`! And who knows?

As `Matsya` was learning, her mind took on new dimensions of thought. She started asking more and more questions. More she asked, more did `Maharishi` explain.  Not only her mind, but her body started taking a new shape. Her skin glowed. Her hair got long and silky and her old smell was gone, replaced by everlasting smell of Sandal. Songs came to her lips. She learnt to dance on slow motion with setting sun. And she learnt to recite Vedas with rising sun. And `Krishna` heard it all, in the safety of his mother's womb.

She gazed and understood the motion of stars in the night sky. And she understood the effect of moon on the waves of `Yamuna`. She knew it was `Yamuna's` holy water that blessed her with this baby but she wondered if `Maharishi` ever embraced her! Ever made love to her like a man would do to his wife. She wanted to know but she was too shy to ask. And she wouldn't change an iota of this new relationship. Even if she was a surrogate, it was well worth the time and experience. But she didn't know the darkness of that night got carried to her womb. The boy was darkest of complexion. And thus the name `Krishna` that meant born out of darkness. But his eyes captured all the stars of the dark night. He would see depths of space that no one in the sun lit day could ever. He would see beyond the motion of Time and bind it to the words. Words that flow like `Yamuna`.

Time moved fast. She was carrying the weight of a divine child. Her breasts swelled up as motherhood took over her. She wanted to be close to `Maharishi` but he knew better. He knew this joy was transient. Enormous pain of bondage was waiting for `Matsya` when she must let a part of her body go. She must leave him behind and break that bond. `Maharishi` knew, every ride of joy must follow with equal load of sorrow. He wanted to keep his distance. He knew it was a divine grace that `Matsya` was turning into most beautiful woman, but he had underestimated the desires that might take on his own mind. It took all his learning and then some, to keep his heart unflinching yet attached in every chore. Never letting `Matsya` and `Krishna` feel the absence of his strength but never crossing the line. He knew it was a test. A test he must pass to pave a new path for the rest. Every morning, he burnt his desires in the holy fire and turned them into hideous smog. He knew he was only a father — not a lover.

The question that haunted him was how `Matsya` would bear the pain of truth. He must give her tools to know the truth. And that he did. He named her `Satyawati` — bearer of Truth. A new identity was born along with birth of `Krishna`. As `Satyawati` took him for first holy dip in `Yamuna`, the mighty river rose to touch his feet. It washed over `Satyawati` too to give her the true perspective. Truth that we are all bound by the waves of joy and grief. Bigger the rise, deeper the fall. Truth that the child in her hands was not hers alone. He must go on to strife the world off duality. How could she let duality take over her mind when she was literally the mother of the one made to define the 'righteous path'. She must accept the truth for she was the bearer of the hidden truth — `Satyawati`.

-----

The village was in a state of shock when `Satyawati` made it to the docks. `Maharishi` had fixed her boat that it looked like new. `Matsya` was long gone from the memory of this village. She docked her boat and turned to a group of fishermen who were looking at her in disbelief — Is there a place to stay in this village and also who is the village head here? I wanted to seek permission to moor my boat in this dock.

The fishermen were speechless. One of them offered her food that his wife had packed. Other offered to take her to the village head. 

The village head — `Dashraaj` in mid eighties, had seen the life long enough to be enchanted from anything glittering. Or at least that was what he thought. His ideas were forcefully changed by `Maharishi` but at core, he still thought he had a role to play. His week eyes couldn't see `Satyawati` well enough, but he couldn't resist the smell. It was as if some Goddess stepped into his home. He stood up in respect and offered a seat and water to `Satyawati`. When she sought his permission to dock the boat, he didn't think twice. `Satyawati` saw the power of fragrance firsthand. She was happy. She kept on — Is there a place I could rent to stay. I have some gold. The word “gold” rang a pleasant bell in `Dashraaj's` ear — you are village's responsibility. You don't need to spend a penny. You are like a daughter to me, why don't you stay with us. I have three daughters who could help you on the boat.

The news of arrival of a beautiful noblewoman had already spread in the village. Men and women stopped at whatever they were doing and flocked to village head's home. Everyone was eager to help a single beautiful woman. Some applauded her for navigating rough `Yamuna` alone. `Satyawati` was stunned in the change. How could same set of people ignore poor `Matsyagandha`? It felt like `Matsya` actually died. Something in her told her she needed more power. Power to rule the entire world. She will never be as exposed and as needy as `Matsya` was. She must build on her gifts.

After few days of rest and enjoying cooked food, `Satyawati` returned to her boat. Along with her three `Dashraaj` girls. They were of her age. They offered to help her on the boat. She was back in business as she saw a line of commuters growing to board her boat. She smiled and a song came to her lips. Life could be much easier for the rich and beautiful — she thought. The thought was soon replaced by the memory of `Krishna`. Every success must be paid in some form, some pain. She reminded herself that `Krishna` was with `Maharishi`. He couldn't have asked for a better father.

Time took the wings again.

`Satyawati's` boat got popular — like a tourist attraction.  People started pouring over just see her and listen to her sing.  And of course the fragrance. She got rich but she was still waiting for the next season of `Maharishi's` prediction. `Dashraaj` declared her as his daughter. There were many suitors who had surrendered their lives' worth for `Satyawati`, but none of them could make her “rule the world”. More importantly, she was curious of the bigger cause that `Maharishi` said she was a part of. This side of `Yamuna` had given her love and respect that she know not existed. 

Back to his `Ashrama`, there was a welcome celebration for `Maharishi` and `Krishna`. No one asked about the mother for they were all busy checking out one year old who could already speak broken `Sanskrit`. He had the `Gaytri Mantra` by heart. `Maharishi Parashara` always kept him with in his eyes. Young `Krishna` was curious. He asked even more questions than his mother. `Maharishi` always eager to respond to him. He learnt music, dance and finally the astrology. One thing always laid heavy on `Maharishi's` mind — `Krishna's` learning was only through words. He hadn't seen the life.

-----

The other side of the river `Yamuna` belonged to the empire. `Shantanu` — A king known for his justice, wealth and valor in the lineage of even bigger names. His empire was spread between `Yamuna` to `Ganges` — the pious river. On the north it reached the peaks of `Himalayas` that protected it's border like a wall of snow. The kingdom had a natural line of control on all the sides — Himalayas, Ganges and Yamuna. Himalayayan glaciers were the source of water — the life energy, and this pure fresh water came to plains through two rivers. Most cities were developed along the two rivers, including `Hastinapur` — the capital. In addition to pure water, and the fish, the rivers also served as the primary transport layer. Wood, weapons, and agricultural produce, moved through the rivers. In other words, `Ganges and Yamuna` were the lifeline of this empire. But there was a problem. Rampant floods made living near the rivers a major risk. There was a need to make sure water stayed in the rivers. While there were many rituals designed to appease the gods of rains, people were working on engineering efforts to deepen the rivers, particularly in stretches where the depth was shallow and thus river used to spread in miles. 

As king circled right of the middle age, he got interested in music, religion and philosophy. Expansion of his kingdom dropped off the priority. He wanted his people safe, well-fed and well taken care.  Luckily, his son, `Devvrata` was even more prudent in managing the vast province. His key skill was his deep understanding of the water ways. He had developed the signalling system with pigeon points located along the river banks, wooden bridges, transport jetties, docks, dams and water locks. This deep knowledge of the engineering made him popular. People started calling him a water bender! His work brought prosperity and security to the kingdom never seen before. People said that the skills that `Devvrata` had, were natural to him because he was son on `Ganga`. That was true because name of her mother was `Ganga`; though later on people started believing that he was a son of the river. The scripture noted that river `Ganges` manifested into a beautiful woman called `Ganaga` to bear `Devvrata`. 

`Dev's` real mother was born on the peaks of Himalayas — near the birth place of river `Ganges` — a place called `Gangotri`. She grew up navigating the rivers in her small kayak — fishing, playing and moving fast through the moving dangerous rapids of Ganges in tall mountains of it's decent. Her fascination for the water and river was such that she used to spend all her time on the river. The local villagers started calling her `Ganga` — the name of the river itself — one who is `Ganges`.

As she grew into late teens, she and her friends who would go on longer and longer voyages in Ganges. Many times for days and weeks. They designed two person Kayaks. They had kayak downstream through rapids and falls, and then carry them back on their shoulders — two persons supporting one Kayak. Climbing the mountains back supporting the Kayaks was used to be painfully long and arduous — sometimes through the thick unchartered forests. Her dream was to design a boat that could sail upstream. And also, she wanted to see if Ganges ever ends. People said that the Ganges finally meets into a vast ocean that can store water of thousands of river. `Ganga` used to wonder why can't we make an ocean and store the water of Ganges for irrigation. Little did the young girl know that stopping the water is like stopping the circle of life. And she learnt it as she entered her early youth.

Longer voyages and turn to adulthood, told `Ganga` that the floods in Ganges were the biggest problems of people downstream. She started a mission to start deepening Ganges where ever it was flattish. Starting from the very top near the origins, she and her team finally reached the plains — working through one flatland to the next. They were welcomed by the local people as they brought skills to deepen a running river. They had designed tools to form a constellation of Kayaks and then lower the harvester to scour the bottom. Many times they recovered valuables from the bottom but the business was not risk free. Many died in the pursuit of these river deepening projects. True to her name, `Ganga` committed her life to this cause or business or engineering project.

The project got so popular that the news reached the king `Shantanu`. He was happy to see people taking on the creative engineering in their hands rather than depending solely on the priests or the king. He also wanted to see if the tools and boats they had designed could be used to move his army. In addition, he also wanted to lend the official support to the project. But most importantly he wanted to see `Ganga` — the woman every one talked about for her courage and dedication.

It was a love at first sight. King admired `Ganga` for her altruism and engineering prowess and she admired the king for his passion to make people's life better. They talked for hours. She was never tired of explaining her scientific observations and he was never tired of listening to her. One fine evening, `Shantanu` proposed `Ganga`. She had her heart out for the king but she was dedicated to the cause. And she was free and she wanted to stay that way. She told `Shantanu` that she was not bound by the rituals. They could meet as long as he was willing to meet her at `Ganges`. He could stay and leave as he wanted and come back when had time. King promised her all the support for her work — gold , men and boats. The mutual admiration turned into an association of life time. `Ganga` however had one more favor to seek from the king. She wanted their offspring to stay with her and take the work she started to the next level. King was happy to oblige except he wanted just one son as heir of vast kingdom. Again against the convention, `Ganga` decided that it will be the last of their born. He was `Devvrata`, the youngest of the eight brothers.

In a way, `Devvrata` was a divine gift from river `Ganga`. At an early age he managed to learn the intricacies of motion of water. The last of eight brothers, all of whom dedicated their lives to the mission of improve peoples' lives using the water from the holy river. Two of them were sent to North by `Ganga` to create a map of Ganges and all its tributaries. Other two went south East where Ganga meets the ocean with a similar goal. Four brothers coordinated their work through pigeons to draw one comprehensive map of river system that makes the most fertile plains of Indus valley and North India. Fifth brother worked on setting up bridges on Ganga. He wanted to help the commuters when there was no boat in the river say during the night time. Sixth worked on techniques to move the boats and tree logs upstream through a system of water locks. Seventh on making levies for low lying villages where flood caused havoc in rainy seasons. Having learnt from all his brothers, who had dedicated their lives to `Ganga` , the youngest `Devvrata` pulled the biggest of all engineering feats at a young age. He created a dam and changed the direction of Ganga such that more people could get help from the waters. During rainy seasons, the dam could be opened to let the water flow in two streams. People thought he was the real water bender. As if he was a Son of `Ganges` — the river. `Devvrata's` life mission was to stay true to the kingdom and it's people. A vow that he carried till his last breath.

As the time passed, `Ganga` had to move South East towards the point where `Yamuna` met `Ganges`. King and Dev were left behind. She wanted to continue to follow her dream. She wanted to see the grand river merge into the vast ocean. And she thought meeting the ocean was her final destination, just like it was for the river.

----

`Shantanu` was so dedicated that he never took time for himself. Particularly after `Ganga` left, he inundated himself to the work. First he was busy in establishing the political balance with neighbors and keeping the `Asuras` at a bay, and then he spent most his time passing on the practices of a righteous politics to `Devvrata`. As his son turned into a flawless statesman, he finally thought of taking some time for himself. He also wanted to visit the entire province and meet grass root people - to understand their lives - live like them - face the pleasures and pains of life like a commoner.

Having made sure that the kingdom was on auto-pilot and  `Devvrata` was fully plugged in, `Shantanu` handed over the reins to his son  and took on this long journey to the farthest reaches of his state. Part of his motivation was to see if `Devvrata` could run the kingdom the way he wanted in his absence. And the other part was obviously to let go the responsibilities and live his own life for whatever was left of it. As part of his journey, he paid visits to many `Ashramas` and `Gurukuls` to earn good will as well to find the deeper meaning of life and it's purpose.

Many months into the journey, king learnt the people were not as happy as he was told. There was rampant rise of debate. Most of his local representatives were spending enormous time and effort on rituals rather than attending to the problems of common people. He was not sure how to handle this problem. He was caught in to duality. What is the right path? 

As king reached the other side of `Yamuna`, he was told that the `Ashrama` of `Maharishi Parashara` was just across the river. He had heard about the philosophy of `Maharishi` and his support for scribing the knowledge rather than spending too much time on rituals. He wanted to meet `Maharishi` to discuss his conundrum but the problem was the other side of `Yamuna` was beyond his official borderline - ruled by variety of `Asura` lords. There was no binding on people to cross the state boundaries but for a king, it could be deemed as an act of aggression - it could destabilize the geo political situation and turn into an unnecessary conflict that he wanted to avoid at any rate. But he did want to see `Maharishi` and he had heard about `Krishna` - the magical son of `Maharishi`.

To avoid unnecessary conflict, `Shantanu` decided to dress up like a commoner and cross the river with common people to visit the `Maharishi's` abode. Not even his body guards. One fine morning, without telling anyone, he took his horse and rode the bank of `Yamuna`. He tied his  horse a mile before  the docks and walked like a peasant. It was though not uncommon for `Shantanu` to visit parts of his state dressed like a farmer or a blacksmith. It was a common practice for kings and ministers to mix with masses to get a pulse on the state of the union. The only difference here was he was heading to an unchartered territory. In a way, it was exciting for `Shantanu` for he was sick and tired of always being in position of power. He wanted to feel unsecured, and unhinged.

As the luck would have it, `Satyawati's` boat reached this side of the bank as soon as `Shantanu` arrived there. A sandalwood fragrance captured the bank. Deers and peacocks flocked to the bank along with waiting commuters to get a chance on `Satyawati's` magical boat. King was mesmerized by the scene. He couldn't have imagined the beauty and serenity of the situation. As he realized, he was dressed like a commoner, he too got into the line to get on the boat.

The voyage took more than an hour but for `Shantanu`, the time stood still. He was almost staring at `Satyawati` and when she started singing with the waves of `Yamuna`, he was transported to another world. First time in years, he wanted to fall in love. He wanted to keep listening to `Satyawati's` raagas. He couldn't imagine music could be so evoking. 

As the boat reached the village, people started disembarking, `Shantanu` kept sitting in the boat. Someone nudged him that it was time to get down. People were throwing the fare in a bucket, expressing their thanks to the crew for a beautiful morning ride across `Yamuna` and hurrying to their daily chores. `Shantanu` got up and without a word, he dropped all the gold coins he was carrying in the bucket. He hadn't even walked few yards that he heard `Satyawati`. As he turned back, she was was getting off the boat - Sir, looks like you left all your wealth for us!  She had all the coins in her hand and she wanted to return them back. 

These pieces of metal are nothing for the experience I had this morning ! - said the disguised king - maybe you can give me a ride back in the evening for I have nothing left on me. And he turned and and walked away from the bank. Another minute there and he thought he would fall for the beautiful girl. 

Where are heading to ? - asked `Satyawati` - still not sure if he should take so much Gold. She was sure that `Dashraaj` would be very happy but something in her told her that this was not a common commuter. 

I am going to see `Maharishi Parashara`. Would you kind enough to point me the direction. I heard he lives nearby. - said Shantanu.

The Ashram is half a mile to the North - Satyawati quickly added - and I will be here waiting for you to get you back across `Yamuna`. And she raised her hand. She felt as if `Maharishi's` second prediction was taking shape. This is the man that she was waiting for. Despite his age, he had an aura of a statesman. `Satyawati` was drawn to him. The fact that he was rich and he left everything he had for her was a sign that she was looking for.

------

Krishna built a deep understanding of the universe. The laws of our nature at an early age. This knowledge needed to be manifested. A text — a long one. Krishna, thus, compiled the entire wisdom in four Vedas — `Rik, Saam, Yazur and Atharva`. There was still a lot that could go as specialized annexes to the `Vedas`. So he went on to write eighteen more books known as `Puranas`. All written in `Panini's Sanskrit`. A piece of poetry never seen before or probably after. 

The four `Vedas` soon became the reference point for the elite. Those who could read Sanskrit and understand the poetry. `Krishna Dvaipayana` thought his life work was done. Just like his father, he was proud of his work. His work was recognized by the kings and he was conferred with the title of `Ved Vyasa` — the final complier of the divine knowledge. 

There was however one question that weighed on Krishna's mind. And he brought this to his father `Maharishi Parashara` who was now bed ridden of the old age. He sat by his father's feet and asked - Is my mission really complete ?

`Maharishi` opened his eyes and smiled at him. He was waiting for his son to ask this question. He said - `Krishna - your mission was to bring this divine knowledge to the masses.



