`Dwaipayana's` lineage predetermined the responsibilities of his investiture - as if destiny spun a multi-generational charter. 

## 0.1
 ----
 
With written word, not only did we get on-demand access to immutable information, the storage capacity too got a boost.  Library of Alexandria, in early days of transcription circa  3rd century BC, presumably had 70,000 to 700,000 Papyrus rolls. A conversion into a modern textbook size should end up to say 200,000 books - a lot, given they were all handwritten and carefully transported to Alexandria. It is said that `Ptolmey` wanted to create an ocean of written words - a vast information store. Storage leads to perpetuity - he believed !

Computers inoculated our information store with third booster - spoken and written being the first two formats. The entire library of Alexandria may fit on a single thumb size SD card today. It is estimated there are over 130 million books in digital form. Internet is still in its infancy, somewhat like the old library was to the "Papyrus" world. As of 2021, there were over 1.83 billion websites. The amount of data stored on the internet is estimated to be in the zettabyte range. One Zettabyte -> billion Terabytes.

> Add to it the offline storage we have in our cell phones and computers. Assuming a standard textbook is ~5 Mb of data, a Terabyte of storage - a normal laptop these days - may accommodate 200,000 books -> You and I carry a library of Alexandria in our backpacks !

The strange thing is this pace is only increasing just like the ever expanding physical universe ! As of now we are doubling the internet as well as offline storage in our gizmos, every two years. In nutshell, we have long passed the point when human could read all the books in print,  much less the content stored on internet -> Hence the rise of large language models that may infer the meaning of words. 

A new paradigm of digital conscious experience [^digitalExperience] is already here - just the way written word led to an exponentially vast conscious experience verses our speech only ancestors. From "vast", I mean spatial dimensions that include time. For example - spoken word is limited to a small space around me - I can experience the things in my home without having to walk into another room. With written word I can imagine events that might have happened ten years in the past. With digital word, I can imagine things happening right now across the globe.

> Abstraction of actions into narratives meant we could experience situations without physical presence. The purpose of abstraction is always to expand the real-time conscious experience further into space and time. Written word, however, has friction - there is only so much I may read, information may get stale in transit, and the experience demands imagination. Digital experience is geared towards reducing the friction. The problem with digital experience, however, is I need ten heads to experience all that I should know ! The question then is - can I make my digital copies to consume information and to act on my behalf ?

In hindsight, the idea of text was profound. With text, humans morphed themselves into a single organization across space and time - a group larger than any other species -  while all other species stuck to their individual existence alone - or in smaller ephemeral groups mostly based on vocal signals. Text was not only the means to establish order in this super sized group - it was necessary to establish a value exchange protocol - accessible and acceptable to all humans. An equitable value exchange mechanism lets evolution of larger happy groups.

Oddly enough no other species adopted text ! Even the mammals such as whales or elephants who arguably have bigger brains than us - why ?



## 0.2
---


The primary difference between humans and other species is our ability to store information outside the evolutionary mechanism. Animals and plants adjust to changing conditions through slow evolutionary cycles. Humans, on the other hand, adapt quicker because we harness knowledge from our vast zettabyte store of information. Knowledge is the magnet that keeps the flock together - it enables larger groups across time and space. Value is a mathematical measure (token) of knowledge. 

> `Karma` is the action that transitions information into knowledge [^knowledge]. `Vipreet Karma` (opposite of `Karma`) - also called `Vikarma`, are the actions that convert knowledge into information. For example when we practice daily to improve our game, it is `Karma`. On the opposite side,  when we play a match to put our skills on display, it is called  `Vikarma`. With `Karma` we ingest information ; with `Vikarama` we radiate information. Both are equally important - like two wheels of a cart. In the process we train a huge biological neural network - human brain.
>
> A set of predefined `Karmas` practiced consistently is called `Yazna`. `Yazna` leads to success (`Siddhi`). For example when you study eight hours a day for say eight long years you become a successful doctor. The same is true for an Engineer, a Scientist, an Economist and thousands of other specializations . The daily ritual of study (and lab) in this case is `Yazna`. `Yazna` becomes effective when performed alone and without the influence of worldly desires. When such fine-tuned skills are used effectively, they become a source of inspiration for the rest -> thus initiating a virtuous cycle of `Karma` and `Vikarma`.

With `Karma` and `Vikarma`, humans created new species with in themselves - even though an engineer and a poet might appear similar at physiological level, they are their own species at the psychological levels. Fueled with written word, we have created a vast universe of diverging skills among ourselves. You may argue other species too sustain information, and they do turn it into knowledge. For example a dog may hide a bone, and he knows how and when to retrieve it back. Golden Retrievers are pretty much a new species of dogs. Bees make beehives to store honey. Elephants remember the river even after hundreds of years. The difference, however, is not only the "size and scope", it is also in  the persistent nature of our storage. In our case the external store of information is vast, shared and is well documented. The last part is important - being documented makes it asynchronously available. It is as if a teacher is always with us - in our books. The recipes of success are available to us in written format. And they are timeless - means Principia written in 1687 is available to us in 2024. No other species has access to massive store of timeless information except in cryptic evolutionary code (DNA). This also means that mathematicians (as a species) have grown over many generations - agriculturists and metallurgists even more.

> The written word, however, was NOT the first quantum jump. The first was when we evolved the first spoken language and enabled barter system of value-exchange. Barter was  based on authenticity of spoken word. Just like spoken word, the value-exchange back then was synchronous. One must have a `Ser` of copper to trade with say 100 `Ser` of wheat - then and there. The deal had to be "as is" - full and final.  

With written word, information became asynchronous. One could write something for consumption of future generations. On the same lines the value-exchange became asynchronous. One could trade a hundred kilos of copper with ten grams of gold and later, as needed 10 gm of gold could be traded for say a quintal wheat - by her grandkids. Akin to storage of information, we figured out how to store value ! 

> The value-exchange model always inherits the properties of communication mode. 

One may take an extreme view that the better ways to communicate are discovered essentially to fulfill the demands of value exchange - they are simply the plumbing to convert organization into an organism - we discovered spoken word because we wanted to trade an apple for a banana - internet was conceived to enable ecommerce ! Such hypotheses may seem stretch of imagination, but one thing is common sense - to form a bigger group, group members do need an established method of value-exchange. And we need larger groups for survival. Larger groups of early men controlled predators. Larger armies often beat the smaller states. In essence a better system of value-exchange leads to larger groups and hence assured survival of its participants. 

> Survival being the primary motive of all living, it makes sense to presuppose value exchange as motivation for sophisticated communication that humans evolved. That said, it isn't clear why no other species developed such finesse.

A possible explanation is in the definition of "Quantum Jumps". A quantum jump is a phenomenon where one species in a group of species becomes such a dominant force that it represents entire ecosystem. The emergent member is known as the "identity" of group. We can see this emergence as "winner takes it all", or conversely as the winner takes responsibility of well-being of all the group members. Even in our bodies, brain assumes the function of guardian of entire body. If later is true, then it is incumbent on humans to provide enough resources and space for bio-diversity - for other species to thrive. How do we accomplish such a massive task? It might jeopardize our own interest ! The answer probably is not the "lack of will" - it is in "lack of capabilities". We simply need another quantum jump to safeguard the planet from ourselves.

The migration from written word to digital word offers that opportunity. Only if we learn to transmit value in digital form !

## 0.3
----

It may take a while for value-exchange method to catch up with new modes of communication - sometimes even centuries - but it always does [^catchUp]. Because information stays highly subsidized unless the value exchange model catches up. For example, before the internet; books, music and video had a decent price tag. Once we figured out digital communication - practically free mode to copy and communicate at the speed of light - the value of information fell exponentially. The vinyl record was discovered in 1948.  Before that , only way to listen to your favorite singer was to attend a live concert - a hefty price tag if you include time and money to a buy a ticket and commute. Then we discovered cheaper cassettes , compact discs, and finally almost free mp3s. In other words, information in digital medium is subsidized by the "creatives" to lure everyone into the new medium - internet. They will be able to seek a fair price for say music, video and code when we figure out a method to exchange value on internet. In essence the internet needs a new method to stream value just the way we stream video or music.  

The selection of gold as a facilitator for value-exchange, too, was not immediate. It took a journey of its own to strike consensus. The reason gold was the best measure - it actually took as much effort to mine a `Tola` of gold as a `Ser` of copper or 100 `Ser` of wheat. All the exchanges were carefully calibrated and adjusted to enable them stand the test of time. Gold was a perfect fit because it was scarce and hard to mine. No one could flood the system with gold as they could with copper or iron - even silver. More importantly, it could be easily transported versus copper, iron or commodities such as wheat. Portability and scarcity made it desirable. Thus, natives of "Golden Sparrow" graciously adopted gold as jewelry. They adorned themselves and their deities with gold. Notably, gold had no other use. It was a pure "store of value" to facilitate value-exchange.

> Enabling timelessness (asynchronous nature) was never free. It took a huge effort to scribe spoken words. Similarly, massive amounts of effort went into mining and minting golden `Ratties` and `Tolas`. It was deemed as fair cost of perpetuity - and speed.

The limitation, however, persisted when it came to space. No one could move gold faster than the fastest horse available at the time. The limitation was similar on the written word though small messages could be sent through pigeons. It took us more than five thousand years to solve the problem of space. With internet, we are now able to send information at the speed of light. Which means our value-exchange system should follow the suite - of course without losing the properties of Gold. Bitcoin, though in early stages of its hyper adoption, is the solution to move value through space at the speed of information - at the speed of light. It may be pertinent to say here that the transfers of currencies is NOT value exchange - it is exchange of credit. A dollar bill is a credit of value equivalent to an arbitrary unit, not the value itself like gold or bitcoin. Unfortunately the said arbitrary unit is often debased without express approval of all the participants in monetary system.

Bitcoin is thus the door to next quantum jump. It will allow us to shrink our physical footprint so that the physical space may be appropriated back to where it truly belongs - our fellow species. It also means humans must migrate into digital spaces, the likes of which are beyond our current imagination. The profound question is how to contemplate that new reality ? But then, if history of human hope is a proof - nothing is beyond our imagination. Our greatest gift is our thoughts. 


## 0.4
---

From a value-exchange perspective, we conquered the time through gold, and we are getting better on both space and time with bitcoin. But even then we are limited by the speed of light. In the physical universe we must obey the laws of physics though there is one exception. One thing that isn't constrained by physical laws is "Thought". No wonder Einstein could figure out speed of light through thought experiments!

Thought is the first order of virtual. Being abstraction of physical actions,  thoughts exist in virtual constructs that look like our physical world. We can see or hear them, but they are beyond our sensory perception of touch. In essence, thought is a narrative that is beyond the scope of physical space and time - it exists in the artificial realm of our minds.

> The three senses of vision, smell and taste are known as consumption senses. They are conduits from real world to our brain. Before text, speech (and hearing) was the only way to communicate what we see, smell or taste. And the fifth sense touch is there to confirm the reality. 
>
> Imagine there are two worlds - physical and digital. We live in physical world and there are replicas of us in digital world. We are identical in every possible way except for the confirmation bias. For example, we can consume digital experiences (thoughts), but we can't touch them. Similarly, our replicas in the digital world may consume "real" experiences, but they can't touch the real. They can confirm the digital experiences the way we touch the real ones.

From experience standpoint, the spoken or scribed narratives are somewhat limited versus the real experience. They need vicarious indulgence of the reader. However, we at the cusp of extreme immersive experiences. 

> Full Dive VR, sometimes referred to as “Matrix-like” VR, is the next level of immersion in virtual environments. It goes beyond just visual and auditory stimuli, aiming to engage all five senses – sight, sound, touch, taste, and smell. The idea is to completely immerse users within a virtual world, allowing them to experience it as though it were real ~ [robots.net](https://robots.net/tech/when-will-full-dive-virtual-reality-be-possible/) 

Full dive sits at the intersection of virtual reality and neuroscience. The idea is complete immersion by directly integrating our senses into the game (or narrative). And the good news is this field is [gaining momentum](https://www.massdevice.com/brain-computer-interface-bci-companies/). At this rate of innovation, in a decade or two, our sensory perceptions may be fully integrated into full dive [^dive]. The inevitability of this technology has opened a pandora box that includes many intriguing questions. The foremost being - if our current universe is really real or virtually virtual ?

> The simplest explanation for the existence of consciousness is that it is an experience being created, by our bodies, but not for us. We are qualia-generating machines. Like characters in Grand Theft Auto, we exist to create integrated audiovisual outputs. Also, as with characters in Grand Theft Auto, our product mostly likely is for the benefit of someone experiencing our lives through us. ~ [Scientific American](https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/confirmed-we-live-in-a-simulation/)

As you may read in the cited article the chances are that we are the characters in a digital reality serving the whims of someone else plugged into a full dive. The theory makes sense but is there a way to prove it in this world ?

One of the thought experiment is, we can prove the hypotheses to be true if we could build something like this ourselves. Can we have a character of our choice, act on demand, in a virtual reality?

Intriguing it may sound - but the answer is yes. In fact, we may not even need to dive in. The idea of ["digital twins"](https://www.mckinsey.com/featured-insights/mckinsey-explainers/what-is-digital-twin-technology) is already in the works. At the risk of oversimplification, a digital twin of me is an AI that I train personally on all the skills I have. For example if I am an eye specialist, a digital version of me will consult on my behalf - in the real world as well as in the virtual world. In the real world, I will need to confirm the observations but in the virtual world, I will only receive the value for the work of my digital twin - she will confirm the digital reality herself when she consults the digital patients. This raises a further question - what exactly are the digital patients ?

Digital patients are the entities like my digital twin. The point is if my digital twin is my exact replica, then it might need to have her car fixed. Such services are something that I can't confirm because I can't touch or feel the digital world the way my digital twin can't confirm the real world. How might we have twins that are our true replicas .. 

> Imagine if we build a digital world in which the computing hardware is perceived like the land in our world. Water is the software that runs on the hardware. Air is the information that my digital twin breathes. Electricity is like the Sun - when world is plugged in and powered, my twin feels like a day. When it of off, the twin experiences night and thus decides to sleep - yet it keeps breathing because information processing is all it needs to do. 
>
> The operating system is the "rules of engagement". It is like the scripture of morality - it defines what my digital twin may or may not do. Beneath the obvious sermons of morality, it defines the interfaces with the hardware while giving my twin a nice three-dimensional user interface. Different virtual worlds follow these core operating system level protocols - of air, water and earth, but they can design the experiences as they want -  just like our cities. A city may be such that it is always on - sun never sets there like the cities near the poles. A low powered city may always be overcast with skies with intermittent drizzles. Cities may have malfunctions, they may fail to deliver good schools or good entertainment. Imagination is the limit - some worlds may have less gravity - some may allow you fly like the birds.

The question is why would we build such cities. And the answer is in why do we have our own circular economy - we want value. The earnings that our digital twin makes go to our join multisig wallet. We can have as many digital twins as we want - of course we need to pay for them. We can put them in any narrative of our choice - in those of future or those of extreme past -  as long as it makes financial sense because each narrative must adhere to prevalent value-exchange models. For example if your digital twin is in a narrative of 1970 - the USD may still hold value because it was still not unpegged from Gold.

In other words, our digital twins are a dimension of our thoughts. It is as if we are living in different narratives. The value may leave the wallet or enter the wallet based on multi-signature rules. Since this it is just one wallet and the lock is in the thoughts - the transmission of value isn't restricted by physical laws. The measure of the value is in the sum total of `Karma` of all our digital twins.

> `Vaidik` science believes `Karma` is the way to transcend value beyond constraints imposed by physical laws. The consciousness pervades in billions of dimensions whereas our "real" user interface is only three-dimensional. We can transfer value through infinitely many more interfaces than what meet the eyes (and other senses). 

To better understand this part we need to dive deeper into constructs of a narrative. The idea was documented by `Dwaipayana` in the first set of written words - `Bhagvad Gita` - A piece of divine information center folded into `Mahabharata` - that he wanted to make accessible to all humans.

## 0.5
----

The shared external storage of information leads to the notion of a "civilization".  A civilization surrounds itself around a core rational and written down information-base. It develops an ecosystem of physical and spiritual tools (through `Yazna`) that enhance the life experience of its participants.  For example - the first civilization was built around  `Vaidik` science, Greco-Romans were founded around the work of Homer and thrived around the likes of Socrates, Plato, Heraclitus, and Aristotle. The rise of Europe was around the Industrial application(s) of modern science, and now America is broadly reaping the digital wealth of information technology. All of them invented tools to enhance conscious experience based on well documented scriptures or scientific method.  

> The enhanced [^enhanced] life experience is nothing but upwards progression of consciousness. Not only does it improve the average longevity, it also adds to  what we explore per unit of time. Fifty years in the twenty-first century is a much richer experience than fifty years of the first century ! Through simple extrapolation, one can imagine how rich experiences humans of say 30th century will have! They may be able to carve out real experiences - to live, play and learn in them - on demand. 
>
> Who knows if we are living in a meta real narrative of our future selves to explore a specific paradigm - to answer questions of our own future ! 

Since the "external store of information" drives human world (civilization) it would be worthwhile to look at its inner constructs. Tiny threads of information are held within inter-connections of the participants - among each other within humans,  and with other animate beings as well as inanimate things - a network of almost infinite proportion. The information flows in the "network" peer to peer - without any central agency. Since there is no central governance, the conscious experience degenerates if the flow is hindered -  unless a properly stored chain of information is accessible on demand. Such a chain is called "history". 

> History provides the context to conscious experience. Surprisingly though, we are never part of history, at least most of us, yet a longer and nuanced history leads to compelling experiences. No wonder `Dwaipayana` chose to document the history of first civilization in `Mahabharata`. History is the base narrative that we live in. Our real worlds are far apart based on the history we believe in.

Any type of "Storage" , has a definitional property - asynchronous nature (or on-demand availability). For example, as long as the current keeps flowing in the grid, it is just "Electricity" but the moment it becomes available on demand (for later consumption), we call it a "battery". The way a "battery" is storage for electricity, a book is storage of information. Thanks to the work of `Dwaipayana`, we have pristine tools for storing the information - text. 

But text alone is not sufficient. It must be expressed in a narrative that catches human attention. The way a battery has two opposite poles - a Cathode and an Anode , a narrative thrives within two opposite characters. A hero and a villain - good versus evil - right versus wrong. While morality is subjective, the polarization makes it a compelling read. A good narrative stays away from the absolutism - it well justifies the villain as much as it celebrates the hero because both are equally important from storage perspective. And such a balanced deliberation reaches deep into both sides of the isle - good or bad.

A narrative has the ability to keep the broken connections alive. A good narrative has the power to revive the connections and to form new ones. We can form real neural connections with the characters of a well constructed story. For example, you may forget the names of your co-workers, but you would never forget the heroes of your early comic books ! 

> The entirety of all the connections is what we know as  `Bramh` in `Vaidik` science. In that sense `Bramh` also includes the connections we form with the fictitious characters of a narrative. The only difference is the latter (connections) are persistent, and thus they render historical perpetuity. 

The important thing here is to understand that information is NEVER stored in the books. It is stored in the connections we form with the characters and situations of the narrative - just like our connections with other animate or inanimate beings of our vicinity. In that sense narratives are the virtual expansion of `Bramh`. 

An equally important consideration is what happens if the characters of a narrative start forming their own connections to other things - that is what we expect from artificial general intelligence - free will (randomness) to form connections. A connection being a saved state of <u>historical interactions</u> available to AGI agents - memory.

Randomness and memory allow artificial general intelligence to expand or excavate a narrative - that is what we do ! No points for guessing that we are AGIs, but the question, however, still remains - how do we transmit value across these virtual constructs ?

## 0.6
---


Before the written scriptures, the storage was first realized with spoken word. Unlike animals, we could remember things told by our parents, and they could what was told to them by theirs. `Bramhrishi Vaśiṣṭha` - great-grandfather of `Dwaipayana`, understood this innate ability of humans and channeled it to preserve information. Thus, precise spoken words - recital, repeated daily as `Yazna` was the initiation of the first civilization. The key was precision of elocution to make the reproduction of spoken word immutable.
 
The problem, however, was the "recital" must be synchronous! And it was hard to keep it distortion free. No matter how hard a reciter tried, sooner or later, his own point of view would infect the content. `Dwaipayana` first edited the four `Vedas` vocally. `Rig Veda`- the oldest scripture known to mankind is around ten thousand verses long. It was the limit of not only vocal editing but also vocal learning - particularly in a non-fiction format. Human mind couldn't bear information without lucid characters and chronological stories. There was no way to forget something older to learn something new. People often wondered how `Dwaipayana` memorized ten thousand verses - and hence they deemed it knowledge from divine. They are also called `Shrutis` [^shruti] - that we learn through hearing. A bigger chain of information could be stored only in written format, and it must be a narrative. The written down words were called `Smrities` - something that is memorized forever by virtue of its conversion into text. The obvious advantage of `Smrities` was one may never worry about forgetting - they could always read it again to reload the contents in their brain. This is exactly why we want to write our passwords down - we want to store them as `Smriti`.

> `Mahabharata` was the first fully scribed narrative - the first `Smriti`.  In `Bhagavad Gita`, Arjuna utters the phrase `Nashto Moha Smritir Labdha` (Chapter 18, Verse 73). This verse signifies Arjuna's resolution and understanding after the teachings of Lord Krishna, where he acknowledges the dispelling of his bondage and the regaining of his memory (smriti) of his duty.

Since `Smrities` are time-less, we can ease ourselves into `Bhagvad Gita` even today - after almost five thousand years. In other words we can travel back in time to live and experience `Mahabharata`. And we can do that with millions of books and websites created since then based on the quality of their expression. All we need is a little more immersive experience and of course a mechanism to send the value through these virtual narratives. Once we do that, we are beyond the constraints of our physical universe. In essence, we become part of the continuum. In that sense the definition of `Bramh` is timeless and beyond the constraints of physical space. 

In `Vaidik` science, being one with `Bramh` is the notion of being one with the continuum. One may experience any narrative of their choice at any time - to consume, to learn, to play or to understand. Choice to be in a narrative does come at a certain cost - the risk that one may get lost in the narrative . The immersive nature of the interface is the cost attached to the narrative - more immersive more bondage. Bondage is caused because we must create connections with the characters and situations of the narrative. In other words, each narrative that we choose to spend our time in comes with a pro forma invoice - that of bondage. We must pay this invoice through proof of work (`Karma`) inside the experience. We accomplish `Karma` through free-will and memory. Work is the only choice available to us, but the work must be in line with the needs of the narrative - `Neeyat Karma` - prescribed duties. When we are paid in full, we have choice to exit or stay longer to enjoy this beautiful sensory interface. We continue to work till we paid in full. All the payments go back to the continuum instantaneously because there is no distance to travel. `Vaidik` science adds that we can even change the physical bodies that we use to experience the chosen narrative - any shape or size that we deem fit for the purpose, just as we choose the avatars in a game. The experience may continue over many births - in different sizes, genders or species. So-called death is metaphorically a change of clothes. Technically speaking, each immersive narrative is a block of information - `Karma` is the proof or work to add it to the blockchain of history! We are mining history ..

The only issue with this arrangement is how to tell the fully immersed agents about this universal agreement ? Full immersion means no information is allowed from outside. All the information must already be in. Creator of the first narrative thus must provide the agreement (`Smriti`) to all users. `Dwaipayana` must invoke `Bramh` to create a narrative of continuum - history of entirety - accessible to everyone in every narrative that follows successively! And he must safeguard the agreement right in the middle - `Bhagvad Gita`. The message too is super simple - you have the entire history bestowed in you - your `Atma`. You are a full node. 

At the outset it may feel as if our goal is to really get rid of the bondage - and many try this path. The definition of full immersion however mandates - there is no way to exit till you submit proof of work.

### notes and other stuff

[^digitalExperience]: Last year I had a chance to spend two weeks in Paris and this year I was lucky to visit Mexico City - a full week dedicated to just roaming around. One thing that sets these two cities apart is the architectural beauty of tall cathedrals, public squares - even the post office buildings! Looking at the architecture of our new cities - railway stations , malls , public squares etc. - one may wonder why our new designs are so utilitarian. There is hardly any architectural beauty as was in the temples and churches built few centuries back. Despite the fact that we have much better tools to build, why did we resort back to a cookie cutter approach? The answer may be - we are building beauty in digital experiences. In essence the creativity has already shifted from the physical to the virtual world and not so by accident - the fact is we are spending more time in virtual experiences rather than the physical ones. Some people may see it as degeneration of conscious experience though the logical deduction is digital represents rise of conscious experience. There is nothing to feel bad about it. And even if we do - there is hardly anything one can do to stop this evolution. We have already digitized our books , our music and our acts  - digitization of money is obvious next step.

---

[^knowledge]: "Knowledge" is hidden in the granular details whereas "Information" is the art of hiding the details. A git repository is a good tool to develop a mental model that contrasts "knowledge" from "information". A git repository typically comes with a readme file - a description of what the code is intended for. This readme file is "information". Most of the time, we may use the code based on the instructions in the readme file - without even knowing the language in which it was written. The information has utility value though utility is NOT knowledge. The "knowledge" is locked in the commits of the repository - how the developer improved the code over successive iterations. Sometimes because she herself was not satisfied and other times because someone raised an issue. Every commit may have some documentation though it is almost impossible to appreciate all the changes that lead to a successful piece of code. "Information" (the utility value) is for every seeker of utility whereas the "knowledge" stays only with the developer who performs repeated actions to improve the code. "Knowledge" can't be communicated because communication must be limited to a catchy narrative or else it gets incomprehensible. Mathematically speaking: "knowledge" = "Information" + "Yazna" (appropriate `Karma` done on regular basis). Since "information" is freely available (massless), the only substantive element is `Karma`.

---

[^catchUp]: It would be wrong to say that information is free to all of us though it seems so because instead of paying for books, music or videos ; we end up paying for the devices. Quite possibly we paid more to acquire computers and smartphones and smart tabs than the free music or text we ever consumed. However, one thing that came free to us and the one that we don't really consider in normal commercial discussions is the amount of free code we use on daily basis. One may wonder how come we are getting all these things free - the answer seems like the creative world wants all of us to adopt the digital word - bit and bytes. Once we all have tools to consume digital stuff, the cost would rise. In essence, we need a native way to pay for the code , music , video and text at the speed of information. Those payment rails are being built now. Now that we have the world hooked to the digital, there appears a need to give every creator ability to monetize their content in a fashion that is truly global and moves at the same speed as the content (or code) itself. We may soon exhaust this free window of subsidized code that we are all enjoying.
- The  most valuable of all forms of information  appears to be code. Every application on smart devices or on the web have hundreds of free libraries of code built into them. Arguably there is not a single application that runs on fully paid code. With bitcoin and lightning networks, small payments may be streamed to these libraries on per use basis. This is in line with the creative commons licence too. The creative commons provide code free as long as the credits are provided, but AI fails to provide credits on regenerated code. Even if it did, the agreement was in human to human - not human to AI.
- The music and video is already moving behind the pay walls though traditional payment rails have tied us with content aggregators  - think Netflix or Spotify. The value for value models being experimented might have a creator directly charging micropayments to the consumers - good for both creators and the consumers. Such models are bound to come because information by definition can't be trapped. 
- With adoption of VR, these mechanisms to micro-pay are going to gain further momentum.
- The bottom line is, over next few years or decades, multiple online methods of value exchange will emerge. Information is always the first thing to monetize on the new value exchange models - for it is risk-free and native. As the acceptance grows, physical goods shift to better value exchange models. It is inevitable.
- Key point to note that the current methods - the credit cards or the banks - are not digital value exchange. They only keep a record. They don't move the digital gold to every party involved in a transaction.

----

[^dive]: Full dive virtual reality is one of the moon shot idea in 2024. The interest in this area is fueled because of recent developments in AI and neuroscience. As of now the hardware probes to simulate all the five senses have already been tested in lab with pigs and monkeys. The first test for the humans is under progress. The early applications are as a hearing aid or to say control of motor actions for Parkinson's disease. Most of these capabilities are being tested by Neuralink as a "brain machine interface".
- The key missing piece is to develop software to invoke a specific narrative in user's brain. The narrative is supposed to serves as the virtual reality script -> history !
- The most promising method is called "scent invocation". It appears that  human brains catalog the narratives, and they use a specific scent to identify the said narrative. It acts like a digital signature. Somewhat like commits in a git repository.
- In essence, a specific narrative may be passed on to humans through hardware probes and find out the specific scent they attach to the narrative. The scents are obviously different for different humans. 
- The holy grail of testing this technology is how do those test candidates respond when they get to smell the exact scent.
- Goes without saying that the subject must be deep asleep during testing or else the narrative may conflict with the experience of reality.

---

[^enhanced]: The enhanced life experience is enabled by tools. Through repetitive actions, the information turns into knowledge (systems).  Knowledge manifests into tools. Tools, however, need energy to operate. Appropriation of energy is thus the most fundamental measurement system. This system is called value exchange.

---


[^shruti]: `Shruti` meant the spoken word when humans used to sustain knowledge, only in the vocal format. Maybe because scribing was difficult. With the advent of writing tools, many `Shruties` were scribed. In essence the scriptures were born out of `Shruties`. The words that got written down, entered the persistent memory of humanity.  Such written down early scriptures were called `Smrities`. The literal meaning of the word `Smriti` is something that has been memorized. For example `Manu Smriti` is among the oldest written down scripture, trans-encoded from `Shruti` to `Smriti`. The Sanskrit word `Shruti` got deformed into `Shutri` in Hindi with passage of time. It is important to bear in mind that every thing that we talk (chatter) is NOT `Shruti`. `Shruties` were consciously identified pieces of wisdom, preserved through formal recital to enable passage of knowledge from one generation to the next. In essence `Shruties` are things memorized through recital, whereas `Smrities` are scriptures memorized by entire human race because they are put into text format.



